[Guest]: I-V-M
[Amit Varma]: And humans for even longer than that.
[Amit Varma]: It seems short-sighted to make
[Amit Varma]: that nation-state the focus of our identity.
[Amit Varma]: And it's equally short-sighted,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, to base our identity
[Amit Varma]: on any other circumstance of
[Amit Varma]: our birth, like our ethnicity
[Amit Varma]: or religion or caste.
[Amit Varma]: Those also haven't been around for too long
[Amit Varma]: and are far more fluid than we realize.
[Amit Varma]: If you think of your identity
[Amit Varma]: as an atomized individual
[Amit Varma]: who is a product of chance and circumstance,
[Amit Varma]: that's part of the truth right there.
[Amit Varma]: But if you see yourself also as
[Amit Varma]: connected to the past, a small part
[Amit Varma]: of something much bigger and older
[Amit Varma]: than yourself, then you need to go
[Amit Varma]: a little further back
[Amit Varma]: than 70 years, or a few
[Amit Varma]: hundred years, or even
[Amit Varma]: a few thousand years.
[Amit Varma]: You need to read Tony Joseph's book,
[Amit Varma]: Early Indians.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics, and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit
[Amit Varma]: Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. I've spoken
[Amit Varma]: to historians on the show before and chatted
[Amit Varma]: about history, but the furthest back I've
[Amit Varma]: gone is a few hundred years. My
[Amit Varma]: guest today, the author Tony Joseph, will
[Amit Varma]: take us back tens of thousands of
[Amit Varma]: years. Early Indians is
[Amit Varma]: a book that answers many important questions
[Amit Varma]: about our species, particularly our species
[Amit Varma]: in India. Where did humans
[Amit Varma]: come from? When did they get to India?
[Amit Varma]: Who are the original Indians, if such
[Amit Varma]: a term applies? Who were the Harappans?
[Amit Varma]: Who were the Aryans?
[Amit Varma]: Whose descendants are we? Are
[Amit Varma]: North Indians and South Indians different from
[Amit Varma]: each other in some fundamental way?
[Amit Varma]: Are tribals lesser than our city
[Amit Varma]: dwellers? Some of these
[Amit Varma]: are questions of politics, but
[Amit Varma]: all of them can be answered only by science.
[Amit Varma]: And in the last few years,
[Amit Varma]: literally in this decade, there have
[Amit Varma]: been radical advances in a number
[Amit Varma]: of sciences that now answer
[Amit Varma]: these contentious questions.
[Amit Varma]: And Tony's remarkable book
[Amit Varma]: reveals all. As does this
[Amit Varma]: episode, so keep listening. I'll begin
[Amit Varma]: my conversation with Tony after a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting
[Amit Varma]: range of new products, including
[Amit Varma]: fridge magnets with some stunning motifs
[Amit Varma]: and salad bowls and platters made of
[Amit Varma]: mango wood. Their artists include
[Amit Varma]: luminaries like Babu Xavier,
[Amit Varma]: Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep
[Amit Varma]: Mishra. They accept bulk orders for
[Amit Varma]: corporate and festival gifting, but even
[Amit Varma]: if you want to buy just for yourself or a
[Amit Varma]: friend, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U. And if you want a 20% discount,
[Amit Varma]: apply the code IVM20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IVM podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount
[Amit Varma]: at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Tony, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much, Amit. It's a pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Tony, two very close friends of mine whom I both
[Guest]: adore and admire and almost revere,
[Amit Varma]: Devangshu Dutta and Nilanjana Roy,
[Amit Varma]: have mentioned to me that you gave them
[Amit Varma]: a gift for Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: What is it?
[Amit Varma]: They have mentioned to me that you gave
[Amit Varma]: them their first job and
[Amit Varma]: that makes you for me an almost mythical
[Amit Varma]: figure. Like you are an early Indian in my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little
[Guest]: bit about your career. I'm really
[Guest]: glad that I did so and
[Guest]: I was glad then that I did so and I'm
[Guest]: glad that looking back that we worked together.
[Guest]: And that was
[Guest]: a time when I was in
[Guest]: business standard with the
[Guest]: brief to start a feature section a day.
[Guest]: That's about, you know, a pull
[Guest]: out full section and
[Guest]: that involved every day
[Guest]: of the week and build the
[Guest]: team that will pull it off. So we
[Guest]: had things ranging from smart investor on
[Guest]: stock markets to the strategist
[Guest]: on management. This is early to mid-90s.
[Guest]: This would be
[Guest]: 80, yeah, that's right.
[Guest]: And you had to find people
[Guest]: for that to staff this and you needed
[Guest]: people who are really, really bright because
[Guest]: you needed to go into new areas that
[Guest]: had not been covered in the
[Guest]: get the talent from existing
[Guest]: newspapers because many they had not been
[Guest]: looking at these areas in the way that we
[Guest]: intended to look at these areas and cover
[Guest]: them. So we might as well
[Guest]: use this opportunity to break
[Guest]: bring in new talent into journalism
[Guest]: and it is absolutely amazing
[Guest]: experience. I think the
[Guest]: people that I worked with in business standard and later
[Guest]: on in business world also and
[Guest]: those were really
[Guest]: outstanding teams and a pleasure to work with.
[Amit Varma]: When did you actually start as a journalist?
[Amit Varma]: What brought you into journalism?
[Amit Varma]: You know when I was growing up in the 80s
[Amit Varma]: the common view about journalists is
[Amit Varma]: that they failed at everything else.
[Amit Varma]: They didn't become an engineer or a doctor.
[Guest]: What brought you into journalism?
[Guest]: Journalism has always been
[Guest]: what shall I say, an attraction
[Guest]: for me because I think the
[Guest]: idea of engaging with public ideas
[Guest]: or public mind
[Guest]: has been exciting. So the place
[Guest]: that I joined us for first was a
[Guest]: newspaper called Newstime. It was a
[Guest]: newspaper that was began for the first time by the
[Guest]: Inado group in Hyderabad. Which year?
[Guest]: This would be 1983.
[Guest]: Right. I would have been all
[Guest]: of 21 years old. Right.
[Guest]: So I started as a trainee with a
[Guest]: stipend of 600 rupees a month
[Guest]: and it was fascinating
[Guest]: that it was a completely new paper then
[Guest]: that would become a late motive
[Guest]: for all of the rest of
[Guest]: my career because I would have always
[Guest]: worked with one year exception.
[Guest]: I always worked in places which were either starting up
[Guest]: or were already there but
[Guest]: were going through a complete rejuvenation
[Guest]: or a complete revamp of some kind
[Guest]: and that's when you actually
[Guest]: learn the innards of a process or
[Guest]: a profession or of a system because
[Guest]: you can see things being put together or being
[Guest]: pulled apart. If you always work in places
[Guest]: that are completely settled
[Guest]: your pace of learning is much much lower.
[Guest]: So yeah, I started
[Guest]: at Newstime in Hyderabad
[Guest]: then I was with India Today in
[Guest]: Delhi for a year
[Guest]: then I joined Economic Times
[Guest]: where I was features editor when I left
[Guest]: in 1991
[Guest]: then I was with Business Standard from 1991
[Guest]: till
[Guest]: 1998 I think
[Guest]: and then I was with Business
[Guest]: World as editor
[Guest]: for about 8 years in all
[Amit Varma]: with a break in between. So you know
[Amit Varma]: a young journalist starting out today has
[Amit Varma]: the advantage of the internet, he can read the best
[Amit Varma]: journalism in the world, he can see back issues
[Amit Varma]: of the New Yorker, the New York Times, whatever
[Amit Varma]: but back then when you were starting out in the
[Amit Varma]: 80s, who were sort
[Amit Varma]: of your journalistic models and
[Amit Varma]: how did your ideas of best practices
[Amit Varma]: and what benchmarks to aim for
[Amit Varma]: evolve over time, like who were
[Amit Varma]: your early heroes for example and how did
[Guest]: that change? When I joined
[Guest]: India Today at that point of time in
[Guest]: 1987, I mean at that
[Guest]: point of time that is the most highly
[Guest]: valued, it's the most
[Amit Varma]: important news
[Guest]: magazine at that point of time
[Guest]: and had made a large impact and a very good team
[Guest]: and I was starting out
[Guest]: as a copy editor on their team
[Guest]: and it was a very good place to be to learn
[Guest]: from the rest of the team as well
[Guest]: When you were in economic
[Guest]: times, you again
[Guest]: that was a period when you are starting out
[Guest]: when you were learning to
[Guest]: change this place from inside out
[Guest]: because you are starting your features
[Guest]: pages in a newspaper that had
[Guest]: never, forget about features, they had never even
[Guest]: new, worked on
[Guest]: anchor news or anything
[Guest]: other than just essentially plain vanilla
[Guest]: news stories that
[Guest]: mostly come out of government announcements
[Guest]: So working with staff
[Guest]: who had been in that kind
[Guest]: of an environment with the same staff
[Guest]: and to try and bring out
[Guest]: completely new, those were learning, so I think
[Guest]: these were periods when you are learning from your
[Guest]: peers, your bosses
[Guest]: and what you are doing yourself
[Guest]: All that changed when I was
[Guest]: in business standard, when you are starting those
[Guest]: sections, because that's when
[Guest]: you realize that each of those sections when you
[Guest]: went into, you did not have models
[Guest]: which you could
[Guest]: pick from anywhere in the country
[Guest]: because nobody was doing anything
[Guest]: of that quality that you could say
[Guest]: I want to beat that or I want to
[Guest]: You first had to look at
[Guest]: the best models in the
[Guest]: world and then look at what
[Guest]: trade-offs did they make
[Guest]: that you don't want to make and what different kind of
[Guest]: trade-offs do you want to make for the audience
[Guest]: and the market that you are in
[Guest]: So if you are looking at stock markets, for example, you will look
[Guest]: at Barron's, you will look at many other
[Guest]: publications, like if you are looking at
[Guest]: building the Strategist
[Guest]: the Harvard Business Review
[Guest]: and the McKinsey Quarterly, so there are a whole range
[Guest]: and the management books that are globally
[Guest]: well accepted
[Guest]: So in each of those areas that we got into
[Guest]: this was when it
[Guest]: became clear or
[Guest]: really clear that your benchmarks have
[Guest]: got to be global
[Guest]: and since then it has been like that
[Guest]: to answer, since I have been in
[Guest]: multiple areas all the time
[Guest]: I would stay with the
[Guest]: Smart Investor for about six months
[Guest]: start the team and then move on
[Guest]: to starting the next section which is
[Guest]: the Strategist, which is management, again build
[Guest]: the team and then move on. So what you
[Guest]: were considering as your competition or
[Guest]: model to beat depends on which areas
[Guest]: that you are in. And when did
[Guest]: you move on from journalism?
[Guest]: You know the entrepreneurship bug bit me
[Guest]: at some point of time and I was looking
[Guest]: at for a way of building something
[Guest]: that is related to media
[Guest]: and in around 2001
[Guest]: we did start a company
[Guest]: I co-founded a company with two, three
[Guest]: others which would work with media
[Guest]: companies abroad
[Guest]: to create, edit
[Guest]: and design their products
[Guest]: but I mean things didn't work out exactly
[Guest]: the way that we planned because the market
[Guest]: collapsed, media, print media
[Guest]: especially in the West
[Guest]: went through the kind of
[Guest]: radical destruction of value that
[Guest]: we have rarely seen in any industry
[Guest]: so they themselves
[Guest]: removed most of their editing staff
[Guest]: so many of the work
[Guest]: that we were planning to get became
[Guest]: our assumptions became
[Guest]: untenable
[Guest]: but you could say this was an
[Guest]: entrepreneurial break or a
[Guest]: period but it was still related
[Guest]: to media and not
[Amit Varma]: outside of it. And sort of
[Amit Varma]: coming to your book now, kind of
[Amit Varma]: early Indians, how did you
[Amit Varma]: start getting interested in this subject?
[Guest]: I have always been
[Guest]: interested. It's not that
[Guest]: I had a greater interest in history per se
[Guest]: but pre-history
[Guest]: for some odd reason which I still
[Guest]: can't fully understand
[Guest]: the Harappan civilization for example
[Guest]: has always had a
[Guest]: great hold on me and
[Guest]: ever since I came across it
[Guest]: and these were also things that
[Guest]: because this is not about chronology
[Guest]: who did what because the very
[Guest]: fact that you cannot know the names of the people
[Guest]: in pre-history because there are no documents or the places
[Amit Varma]: I mean the definition of pre-history is before
[Guest]: writing starts
[Guest]: and therefore you are dealing
[Guest]: with actual issues because to me
[Guest]: what is frustrating in history
[Guest]: is that there are too many people and too many
[Guest]: specific
[Guest]: issues and specific concerns
[Guest]: and in pre-history when you don't have any of
[Guest]: those things you are dealing with pure issues
[Guest]: it's not talking about
[Guest]: perspectives it's about what
[Guest]: really happened here so some of the
[Guest]: questions that were on my mind which has always
[Guest]: been the case is who were the Harappans
[Guest]: where did they come from where did they go
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: why did it take more than a thousand
[Guest]: years imagine this more than a thousand years
[Guest]: for cities
[Guest]: and urbanism itself to rise up
[Guest]: again in the subcontinent
[Guest]: it strikes you if you haven't
[Guest]: been to Dhaulavira in Gujarat please go
[Guest]: one day it's one of the
[Guest]: major Harappan centres
[Guest]: the most distinctive Harappan
[Guest]: city in India today
[Guest]: and it's a
[Guest]: stunning sight you know most of the
[Guest]: superstructure has already been destroyed so you
[Guest]: can only see the substructure
[Guest]: the foundations but even
[Guest]: seeing that you can see the robustness
[Guest]: with which these places
[Guest]: were built and you should see
[Guest]: the scale of the ambition you know
[Guest]: there's a large stadium
[Guest]: stands for people and you can imagine
[Guest]: what could have been going on there
[Guest]: just that scale of ambition
[Guest]: and the sturdiness with which things
[Guest]: are built the huge reservoirs that have
[Guest]: built and
[Guest]: then you realize that
[Guest]: this was would have been around 2600
[Guest]: BCE
[Guest]: and you have to wait till the Mauryans
[Guest]: arrive you know
[Guest]: nearly a thousand five hundred years later
[Guest]: to see structures
[Guest]: of that scale ambition
[Guest]: again so these were questions
[Guest]: that did not have good answers to
[Guest]: they were suppositions
[Guest]: so around six years ago
[Guest]: I decided that it would make sense
[Guest]: to try and look at the Harappan
[Guest]: questions in detail and see where
[Guest]: we are compared to where we were then
[Guest]: and what all the
[Guest]: relevant disciplines today based on
[Guest]: current research has to say
[Guest]: on the equation I thought I would be able to write a big
[Guest]: story or a cover story
[Guest]: somewhere on the Harappans
[Guest]: and I started going to all these
[Guest]: sites, Tholavira,
[Guest]: Lothal in Gujarat, Rakhigarhi
[Amit Varma]: in Haryana. How did it feel to see all these
[Amit Varma]: places because to someone who is not aware of the context
[Amit Varma]: or the history it will just be ancient ruins
[Amit Varma]: or whatever but you are actually
[Amit Varma]: going there with a sense of what it was
[Amit Varma]: and what the ambition behind it was and how old
[Amit Varma]: it all is. That's right. And how was
[Guest]: the experience? Oh it's absolutely stunning
[Guest]: and the visit to Tholavira
[Guest]: I would say of all the places
[Guest]: I have visited a lot of places I have been to
[Guest]: other prehistoric places in India
[Guest]: which are not related to the Harappans
[Guest]: but that happened later
[Guest]: but the visit to Tholavira was
[Guest]: really moving because
[Guest]: at that point of time
[Guest]: it was not yet when I visited it was not yet
[Guest]: fully clear are these
[Guest]: people our ancestors or
[Guest]: did they people who came from somewhere and disappeared
[Guest]: now we know of course that they are
[Guest]: to stand there and see the work
[Guest]: that had been done and
[Guest]: the streets that had been laid out
[Guest]: because you can see the streets right
[Guest]: and when you can see the streets you can almost
[Guest]: see even though they are not there you can
[Guest]: almost see the people walking down there
[Guest]: visually it projects itself onto your mind
[Guest]: so it was a very very moving
[Guest]: experience. Lothal is a port city
[Guest]: and yeah
[Guest]: it also is much smaller than Tholavira
[Guest]: but a stunning one. Rakhigarhi
[Guest]: there is nothing much to see
[Guest]: because whatever has been excavated
[Guest]: they haven't they have filled it up again
[Guest]: and to preserve it I think
[Guest]: but there is nothing much to see
[Guest]: but it is still interesting to
[Guest]: go there and imagine that this
[Guest]: place there used to be a thriving
[Guest]: civilization the best of its time
[Amit Varma]: and the interesting thing is you said
[Amit Varma]: that you sort of got interested
[Amit Varma]: in this again about you know 6-7 years
[Amit Varma]: ago and that's around the time
[Amit Varma]: that the science was also evolving
[Amit Varma]: at a rapid pace
[Amit Varma]: in fact if I may quote from your book
[Amit Varma]: quote just to get a sense of the speed
[Amit Varma]: at which things have moved consider this
[Amit Varma]: when work on this book began 6 years ago
[Amit Varma]: we did not know who were the people of the Harappan
[Amit Varma]: civilization or where their
[Amit Varma]: descendants had gone but now
[Amit Varma]: we do. 6 years ago we did not know
[Amit Varma]: how much of our ancestry we owed to the
[Amit Varma]: original out of Africa migrants who reached
[Amit Varma]: India about 65,000 years ago
[Amit Varma]: but now we do. 6 years
[Amit Varma]: ago we did not know when the caste system
[Amit Varma]: began but now we can zero in on the
[Amit Varma]: period with a fair degree of genetic accuracy
[Amit Varma]: these are just a few examples that
[Amit Varma]: demonstrate our rapidly improving understanding
[Amit Varma]: of prehistory and not just with regard to India
[Amit Varma]: stop quote and
[Amit Varma]: what you go on to describe in the pages
[Amit Varma]: of your book and I urge all the listeners to read
[Amit Varma]: it for themselves but what you go on to
[Amit Varma]: describe is a
[Amit Varma]: sort of a revolution in the science
[Amit Varma]: not just in like one field
[Amit Varma]: of it but you have looked at like
[Amit Varma]: 6 or 7 different disciplines
[Amit Varma]: here to kind of come to the conclusions
[Amit Varma]: but that you've come to which is
[Amit Varma]: now the new evolved understanding of what
[Amit Varma]: exactly happened and I
[Amit Varma]: had absolutely no idea all of this has happened
[Amit Varma]: till I read your book to be honest so tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about what has happened in the
[Guest]: science. Yeah when I started on this
[Guest]: 6 years ago I wasn't
[Guest]: aware of the revolution that is
[Guest]: happening with population genetics I wasn't
[Guest]: I was barely conscious of the fact that there
[Guest]: is something called population genetics
[Guest]: that might be relevant to the
[Guest]: area that you're looking at I was
[Guest]: going through sites I was talking to archaeologists
[Guest]: who had excavated them I was talking to
[Guest]: historians I was talking to epigraphists who
[Guest]: had looked at the script
[Guest]: talking to philologists who might have
[Guest]: something to say about what the old texts have
[Guest]: to say about these things
[Guest]: so I was going through
[Guest]: all the traditional disciplines which
[Guest]: they themselves had
[Guest]: progressed during the last few decades
[Guest]: that one had not been following it
[Guest]: so it was quite interesting
[Guest]: to see how far we had come and
[Guest]: so it's only about 2-3 years into the
[Guest]: research then you start
[Guest]: understanding that hey
[Guest]: a lot of new interesting information is coming
[Guest]: from a new field that you had not been focused on
[Guest]: which is called population genetics
[Guest]: and they were using understanding
[Guest]: of the genome of present day populations
[Guest]: mostly initially
[Guest]: to work out affinities between
[Guest]: different population groups
[Guest]: and that is absolutely interesting to the
[Guest]: question of who were the harapins
[Guest]: so then I started reading in the
[Guest]: papers and getting in touch with the
[Guest]: world's leading experts
[Guest]: in India and outside
[Guest]: and discussing with them
[Guest]: their work and what they were finding
[Guest]: and how it has been changing
[Guest]: and during this process what you realized
[Guest]: also is that population
[Guest]: genetics itself is a
[Guest]: science that is proceeding
[Guest]: at a very fast rate
[Guest]: it's progressing, it is introducing
[Guest]: new ways of analyzing
[Amit Varma]: and the cost of doing
[Amit Varma]: It almost seems like it's not incremental
[Guest]: it's exponential, that's how it felt to me
[Guest]: I think all disciplines go through that at some point
[Amit Varma]: in their lifetime, maybe automotive
[Guest]: technology does that, then it stabilizes
[Guest]: I think all disciplines in their
[Guest]: life has a period when it is
[Guest]: ramping up very rapidly
[Guest]: in terms of its understanding
[Guest]: and tools that it uses
[Guest]: so population genetics went through that phase
[Guest]: in the last 4-5 years
[Guest]: so and
[Guest]: then in the last 2-3 years
[Guest]: what has happened is that they started
[Guest]: using ancient DNA
[Guest]: that is DNA from people who lived
[Guest]: thousands or tens of thousands of years ago
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: the whole game changed
[Guest]: because now you can not only understand
[Guest]: affinities between populations
[Guest]: now you can answer the question who moved
[Guest]: where and when
[Guest]: and that is dramatic right
[Guest]: because that answers
[Guest]: the most basic questions
[Guest]: about prehistory of people
[Guest]: movements that formed populations
[Guest]: and these have answered questions
[Guest]: not just in South Asia, they have answered
[Guest]: questions of population formation in
[Guest]: Europe, in the
[Guest]: Americas, in Australia
[Guest]: in every part of the world
[Guest]: so India is just one part
[Guest]: of the new understanding
[Guest]: of prehistory and how populations
[Guest]: formed across the world
[Guest]: to finish it, it just
[Guest]: happened to be looking at these issues
[Guest]: when a new
[Guest]: science happened to be there
[Guest]: providing the answers, so it was serendipitous
[Amit Varma]: you could say in that way
[Amit Varma]: serendipitous and you know you've got a
[Amit Varma]: very complicated and nuanced
[Amit Varma]: discussion in your pages of population
[Amit Varma]: genetics and I'll just urge everyone
[Amit Varma]: to read, it can't possibly be summed up
[Amit Varma]: I took those pages very slow to kind of
[Amit Varma]: make sure I could understand
[Amit Varma]: all of that, but the basic
[Amit Varma]: thing is that if you are for example
[Amit Varma]: trying to now go back
[Amit Varma]: in history and tell all those grand
[Amit Varma]: stories like you said, you know
[Amit Varma]: without perspective, just what happened
[Amit Varma]: where did we come from, where did we move, what were the
[Amit Varma]: roots of migration, all of that can be told
[Amit Varma]: through genetics because through each
[Amit Varma]: generation you have those imprints coming down
[Amit Varma]: and you can go back in history and
[Amit Varma]: figure out all of that exactly
[Guest]: is that a correct summation?
[Guest]: Yes, because of mutations
[Guest]: that happen over time
[Guest]: and mutations are carried on
[Guest]: through successive generations, not everybody
[Guest]: has the same mutations
[Guest]: you can't find affinities between
[Guest]: people who carry
[Guest]: the same kind of genetic fingerprints
[Guest]: or marks or mutations
[Guest]: that's one way of
[Guest]: I think my book explains it
[Guest]: in much more detail, that's one way of
[Guest]: describing how it is possible to look at
[Guest]: different populations and see
[Guest]: genetically without
[Guest]: anything else, just their genomes
[Guest]: to see who, which populations
[Guest]: are related to which populations
[Guest]: and to what extent, for example
[Guest]: we now know that all
[Guest]: populations outside of Africa
[Guest]: came from a
[Guest]: small subset of the
[Guest]: African population that moved
[Guest]: out of Africa around 70,000 years
[Guest]: ago. This is a genetic
[Guest]: discovery. It's a genetic
[Guest]: discovery based on the huge understanding
[Guest]: of the genetic diversity of
[Guest]: existing human population
[Guest]: around the world in Africa and outside
[Guest]: of it and we know that all of the
[Guest]: people outside of Africa come from a very
[Amit Varma]: small subset. And these are all
[Amit Varma]: generically called out of Africa migrations
[Guest]: That first one migration
[Guest]: out of which people went out to populate
[Guest]: all of the rest of the world is called the out of Africa
[Amit Varma]: migration. And this happened
[Amit Varma]: around 70,000 BCE
[Amit Varma]: and then you talk about how around
[Amit Varma]: 65,000 BCE or 60,000
[Amit Varma]: BCE you have India
[Amit Varma]: being inhabited by what you
[Amit Varma]: by these migrants from Africa
[Amit Varma]: whom you describe as the first Indians
[Amit Varma]: Correct. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit more about you know how
[Amit Varma]: we get this kind of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: and what are the kind of patterns of migration across
[Amit Varma]: the world during this time from out of Africa
[Guest]: The out of Africa migration
[Guest]: now we have, now you
[Guest]: need to use archaeology
[Guest]: and other disciplines also to
[Guest]: arrive at rough dating of
[Guest]: how people went to
[Guest]: arrived at different continents. For example, we
[Guest]: know that the
[Guest]: earliest modern humans or homo sapiens
[Guest]: to reach
[Guest]: the Americas, that was the last
[Guest]: major continent to be occupied by
[Guest]: modern humans was only about
[Guest]: 16,000 years ago. We
[Guest]: know that Australia
[Guest]: and this is by archaeological evidence
[Guest]: we know that Australia was
[Guest]: occupied by modern humans
[Guest]: at least by around
[Guest]: 59,000 years ago
[Guest]: and that Southeast Asia was occupied by
[Guest]: modern humans at least by around 63,000
[Guest]: years ago. So if you know that
[Guest]: the first out of Africa migration
[Guest]: happened around 70,000 years ago
[Guest]: using genetics and some
[Guest]: amount of climatic
[Guest]: possibilities at that point of time
[Guest]: and you know that they reached Australia around
[Guest]: 59,000 years ago
[Guest]: then it is reasonable to assume that they were in
[Guest]: India by around 65,000
[Guest]: years ago. I think the people
[Guest]: who moved on from India
[Guest]: went across to Southeast Asia
[Guest]: East Asia, Japan,
[Guest]: India, sorry China
[Guest]: and they also went across to
[Guest]: Australia
[Guest]: and the best understanding
[Guest]: is that there is one stream of out of
[Guest]: Africa migrants who went up
[Guest]: what is today Pakistan into
[Guest]: Central Asia and then
[Guest]: West and they might have another group
[Guest]: that went even across West Asia
[Guest]: into Europe. We know
[Guest]: that the earliest science of modern humans
[Guest]: in Europe is around 45,000
[Guest]: years ago or so. So
[Guest]: that's the very rough
[Guest]: sketch of the peopling of the
[Amit Varma]: world. You can, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the other interesting thing is that
[Amit Varma]: we weren't the, I mean those out of
[Amit Varma]: migrants weren't the first humans here
[Amit Varma]: that you know, I mean we are all of course
[Amit Varma]: homo sapiens which are the only surviving human
[Amit Varma]: species left but there were various other human species
[Amit Varma]: across the world and what I kind of
[Amit Varma]: found fascinating was where you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: homo sapiens in Africa
[Amit Varma]: if you look at the evidence they did not really
[Amit Varma]: intermingle with other humans
[Amit Varma]: but everywhere else they went
[Amit Varma]: they intermingled. For example
[Amit Varma]: to quote again from your book
[Amit Varma]: quote, all non-African
[Amit Varma]: homo sapiens today carry about 2%
[Amit Varma]: Neanderthal genes in their DNA.
[Amit Varma]: Some of us like the Melanesians, Papuans
[Amit Varma]: and Aboriginal Australians also carry
[Amit Varma]: 3-6% Denisovan DNA.
[Amit Varma]: Because of the genetic inheritance
[Amit Varma]: we may call them our ancestors
[Amit Varma]: but it is perhaps more reasonable
[Amit Varma]: to see them as our evolutionary cousins
[Amit Varma]: with whom homo sapiens
[Amit Varma]: did dally.
[Guest]: Stop quote. It only
[Guest]: means that Neanderthals were present
[Guest]: in Europe and Denisovans
[Guest]: were present in Central Asia and those
[Guest]: regions. And we partied with them.
[Guest]: And we partied with them.
[Guest]: But it doesn't mean that
[Guest]: if Neanderthals were not in Africa
[Guest]: they couldn't have mixed with Neanderthals. Exactly.
[Guest]: But there were many more species of
[Guest]: homo species in Africa
[Guest]: than in outside of Africa.
[Guest]: So it is a given
[Guest]: that they would have mixed. In fact
[Guest]: the beginning of the modern human
[Guest]: himself would have been as a result of
[Guest]: multiple mixtures between
[Guest]: different species of the
[Guest]: homo species. So it is just that
[Guest]: in Africa you would not see
[Guest]: evidence of mixing with Neanderthals
[Guest]: or Denisovans because they were
[Guest]: probably not in Africa. They were
[Guest]: in those regions. And the
[Guest]: out of Africa migrants came across them
[Guest]: when they immigrated out of
[Guest]: Africa. And they did mix with them.
[Guest]: Must have mixed with them pretty early for all of us to have
[Guest]: around 2% Neanderthal
[Amit Varma]: ancestry. Marvellous. And
[Amit Varma]: through all these years like before
[Amit Varma]: we sort of come to modern
[Amit Varma]: times of 7000 BC which is going
[Amit Varma]: to be our next stop. But before we come there through all this
[Amit Varma]: time, how were these human migrations
[Amit Varma]: and the evolution
[Amit Varma]: and the dominance of homo sapiens affected by
[Amit Varma]: things like geography and geology and weather?
[Guest]: Very very significantly. I
[Guest]: think since when we
[Guest]: talk about tree history we are talking about
[Guest]: such large spans of
[Guest]: time. And we
[Guest]: are usually used to speaking about
[Guest]: decades or centuries
[Guest]: etc. In which case
[Guest]: climates and these don't change
[Guest]: all that much. So this
[Guest]: is a radical shift that takes place when you are
[Guest]: discussing tree history that you have to
[Guest]: because that's a predominant
[Guest]: formation of and affects human
[Guest]: behaviour. For example
[Guest]: when many of the
[Guest]: population movements, how do
[Guest]: humans or even
[Guest]: animals or mammals move from one
[Guest]: place to another? What is it that
[Guest]: drives it? One of the things that
[Guest]: drives it is
[Guest]: you know dramatic climate changes.
[Guest]: During the glacial ages
[Guest]: since almost all of the water
[Guest]: is locked up in ice
[Guest]: sheets, there is very little
[Guest]: evaporation, much less evaporation happening
[Guest]: and so glacial ages are very arid.
[Guest]: So quite apart from the fact that
[Guest]: a lot of the world will be
[Guest]: covered in ice sheets, even other parts
[Guest]: that are not covered in ice sheets, there
[Guest]: is a very great aridity. So
[Guest]: places that would have been earlier
[Guest]: luxurious and thriving with life
[Guest]: and greenery would
[Guest]: go back to being deserts.
[Guest]: So and when
[Guest]: warms up again, then you see
[Guest]: there are new lush pastures where
[Guest]: there were deserts earlier and
[Guest]: you would then see animals
[Guest]: and you know moving in there
[Guest]: because there is a new territory for them
[Guest]: and when animals or cattle
[Guest]: move in, you can also see their predators
[Guest]: and humans and everybody moves in. That's
[Guest]: what makes
[Guest]: one of the earliest historic
[Guest]: monuments of people or even the out of Africa
[Guest]: migrations would have been shaped
[Guest]: by these changes in
[Guest]: climates in various ways.
[Guest]: And sometimes it may not be in ways
[Guest]: that we imagine, it might be in counterintuitive
[Guest]: ways also because
[Guest]: if there is greater aridity, it may mean
[Guest]: they have to move to new areas
[Guest]: in search of
[Guest]: food. So
[Guest]: this has to be taken into account
[Guest]: when any specific question
[Guest]: of the prehistoric period is being
[Guest]: taken into account. And my book talks
[Guest]: about how around 35,000
[Guest]: years ago in the Indian
[Guest]: subcontinent, while there
[Guest]: is evidence that there is something dramatic happened,
[Guest]: the climate deteriorated,
[Guest]: modern humans started using
[Guest]: because they were in competition with
[Guest]: the previous would have been for
[Guest]: the same kind of remaining
[Guest]: refuges that are there, that are
[Guest]: usable for homo species.
[Guest]: We can see them using,
[Guest]: relying more and more on
[Guest]: advanced weaponry such as microlithic
[Guest]: tools, which are usually associated
[Guest]: with modern humans and not with
[Amit Varma]: the... But 35,000 BC they were using
[Guest]: natural... Yeah, that's right.
[Guest]: Microlithic
[Guest]: tools which can be used for
[Guest]: spears, arrows,
[Guest]: blades and things like that.
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: you can see genetic evidence says
[Guest]: that their population increased actually during that period.
[Guest]: So you can
[Guest]: see where climate deteriorating,
[Guest]: conflicts arising, modern
[Guest]: humans using, relying more on
[Guest]: new technology that they have introduced
[Guest]: and they are succeeding widely
[Guest]: and their population expanding
[Guest]: during a period
[Guest]: by 20,000 BCE
[Guest]: scientists say that it's likely
[Guest]: that South Asia
[Guest]: and the Indian subcontinent was
[Guest]: the center of modern human population.
[Guest]: So next time somebody says, you know,
[Guest]: we are the largest population or one
[Guest]: of the largest centers, it's nothing new. We have
[Guest]: always been one of the largest centers
[Guest]: or if not the center
[Guest]: of modern human populations.
[Guest]: And in fact that might apply to
[Guest]: earlier homospecies too.
[Guest]: This region has been very, very
[Amit Varma]: good for the homospecies.
[Amit Varma]: This is indeed where the party is. We'll take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break, which in terms of
[Amit Varma]: geological time will get over
[Amit Varma]: very fast.
[Unknown]: Hello everybody. Welcome to another
[Unknown]: awesome week on the IVM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you aren't following us on social media, please make sure
[Unknown]: you do. We're IVM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook
[Unknown]: and Instagram. Just a couple of notes up
[Unknown]: front. One is that we're still running
[Unknown]: our listener survey. That's ivmpodcast.com
[Unknown]: slash survey. The survey is only going to run
[Unknown]: until the end of the week. So if you want a chance to win
[Unknown]: that awesome mug that we're giving out, please make sure
[Unknown]: that you fill out that survey. Also, I wanted to put
[Unknown]: out a quick reminder that if you're enjoying what you're
[Unknown]: listening to, please take a screenshot of what
[Unknown]: you're listening to. Tag us on Instagram
[Unknown]: and we'll put that in our story so that everybody
[Unknown]: else can see what you're listening to. Also, please don't forget to
[Unknown]: put in a comment. On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is
[Unknown]: joined by lawyer Ambar Rana, who talks about his
[Unknown]: family's army background, how jingoism is
[Unknown]: detrimental to patriotism, the notoriety
[Unknown]: cases in his law practice, and how he addresses
[Unknown]: them on his podcast, Know Your Kanu.
[Unknown]: That's on the IVM Network. On episode
[Unknown]: two of our new foreign policy show, States of
[Unknown]: Anarchy, Hamsadi talks to Dave Salvo
[Unknown]: and Brett Schaefer about Russian hacking in the
[Unknown]: US elections. On How To, citizen
[Unknown]: Meghnad and Shreyas are joined by comedian and satirist
[Unknown]: Ashish Shakia to discuss chapter nine
[Unknown]: on public facilities. On the Sponge
[Unknown]: Podcast, Ambi explains why it is consequential
[Unknown]: to set expectations on a realistic level
[Unknown]: and then slowly elevate them. On
[Unknown]: Shunya One, founder of Wayopo, Chirag Triplani
[Unknown]: joins Sreeladitya to talk about the growing
[Unknown]: Indonesian tech startup culture. On
[Unknown]: Garatantra, Saryu and Alok are joined by
[Unknown]: expert Venkat Anand to discuss the influence
[Unknown]: of social media in the coming elections and how
[Unknown]: it has changed the playing field. And with that,
[Unknown]: let's continue on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome
[Amit Varma]: back to the Scene in the Unseen. I'm chatting with
[Amit Varma]: Tony Joseph about his book
[Amit Varma]: Early Indians and some really old times.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get a little more modern now.
[Amit Varma]: Let's come all the way to 7000 BC
[Amit Varma]: and around 7000
[Amit Varma]: BC is where
[Amit Varma]: you talk about a place
[Amit Varma]: in Balochistan called Mehrgarh.
[Guest]: Why is Mehrgarh significant?
[Guest]: Mehrgarh is hugely
[Guest]: significant because
[Guest]: it changed earlier assumptions about
[Guest]: the Arabian civilization
[Guest]: about how it began.
[Guest]: Assumptions that Arabian civilization
[Guest]: was just offshoot of the Mesopotamian
[Guest]: civilization. Now we know that it is not so.
[Guest]: It has a long history
[Guest]: before the civilization began.
[Guest]: Mehrgarh is the first place
[Guest]: where you can see
[Guest]: the earliest beginnings of agriculture
[Guest]: that sustained itself
[Guest]: over a long period of time. There's another region
[Guest]: called Lahurudeva in
[Guest]: Ganga plain in UP today
[Guest]: where they have around 7000
[Guest]: BC again evidence of people,
[Guest]: first Indians experimenting with
[Guest]: harvesting of wild
[Guest]: cereals, if not cultivation of
[Guest]: wild. It could have grown into cultivation
[Guest]: of cereals also, but we don't have full evidence.
[Guest]: But in any case, that did not
[Guest]: develop into a full-fledged
[Guest]: rice-based, this was rice
[Guest]: that they were harvesting.
[Amit Varma]: Agriculture in... And would some of this have
[Amit Varma]: come about because the climate also was appropriate
[Guest]: to sort of... Right.
[Guest]: Around the time, after the glacial
[Unknown]: age ended, around 12000
[Guest]: years ago, and the
[Guest]: climate started warming up, you can see
[Guest]: popular modern humans across
[Guest]: many parts of the world were experimenting
[Guest]: with various ways of
[Guest]: agriculture. So it is not that it just
[Guest]: began in one place and spread everywhere. People
[Guest]: in different parts of the world were experimenting with
[Guest]: different things. Some wouldn't have succeeded,
[Guest]: some would have succeeded. Some would
[Guest]: have succeeded for a long time and then
[Guest]: disappeared. So many things have to come in
[Guest]: place for it to sustain
[Guest]: itself over a long period of time.
[Guest]: So, we know that
[Guest]: Mehrgarh is one of those places
[Guest]: starting from around 7000 BC
[Guest]: we can see that there is a settlement
[Guest]: and we can see that they are
[Guest]: doing farming. They are cultivating
[Guest]: cereals, barley, wheat.
[Guest]: We can see they are domesticating
[Guest]: animals. Initially they don't have
[Guest]: pottery and later on around
[Guest]: 6000 BC they start having...
[Guest]: You can see how the initial pottery is.
[Guest]: It's put together with bitumen.
[Guest]: So, we can almost see
[Guest]: the civilization starting up.
[Guest]: From earlier...
[Guest]: The earliest phases they are depending
[Guest]: on wild animals
[Guest]: for example. As time goes on
[Guest]: you can see it's the domesticated from the
[Guest]: remains of their feasts that you can see
[Guest]: it's their dependence on domesticated
[Guest]: animals goes up dramatically.
[Guest]: So, Mehrgarh gives you a very good
[Guest]: understanding of how
[Guest]: a new way of living
[Guest]: is dramatically different from the earlier
[Guest]: Handakadra life
[Guest]: took root in the Indian subcontinent
[Guest]: and spread across the entire
[Guest]: northwestern region
[Guest]: from over a period of time
[Guest]: ultimately of course
[Guest]: leading to the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: because without going through
[Guest]: the phase of agriculture and the
[Guest]: surplus that it produces
[Guest]: you can't imagine a civilization rising
[Guest]: and agricultural revolution
[Guest]: in that part of Indian subcontinent
[Guest]: led to the Harappan civilization
[Amit Varma]: that followed. And you know obviously
[Amit Varma]: when we look back on history or prehistory
[Amit Varma]: there's always a benefit of hindsight. Everything seems
[Amit Varma]: inevitable. But if you were
[Amit Varma]: to sort of simulate
[Amit Varma]: the starting of an agricultural
[Amit Varma]: revolution, you are going to
[Amit Varma]: eventually proceed in exactly
[Amit Varma]: the way history seems to have proceeded
[Amit Varma]: in this case because you'd logically
[Amit Varma]: assume that because of agriculture you have
[Amit Varma]: a lot more surplus time for the
[Amit Varma]: people that finds expression firstly
[Amit Varma]: in cultural ways such as you point
[Amit Varma]: out through the beginning of pottery and
[Amit Varma]: also myth making narratives all of that stuff
[Amit Varma]: that happens later. And it also
[Amit Varma]: finds expression in
[Amit Varma]: urbanization and that also takes a period of
[Amit Varma]: time but eventually you will expect to see
[Amit Varma]: cities develop, you'll expect to see cultures
[Amit Varma]: develop, myths and narratives develop
[Amit Varma]: language develop, all of it
[Amit Varma]: kind of is completely logical and that's
[Amit Varma]: exactly how it works. So it almost
[Amit Varma]: seems as if once you have the climate changing
[Amit Varma]: after the glacial age
[Amit Varma]: a Mehrgarh is inevitable and from
[Amit Varma]: there eventually a Harappan
[Amit Varma]: civilization is inevitable.
[Guest]: There are lots of important
[Guest]: variables, there are lots of
[Guest]: luck, so to
[Guest]: say, that is needed for this to
[Guest]: happen in that way. For example
[Guest]: there has
[Guest]: there is nothing that says the moment
[Guest]: you take to agriculture that your productivity
[Guest]: will be high enough
[Guest]: for you to have, not
[Guest]: everybody to have to work at
[Guest]: farming and some people can
[Guest]: be employed in
[Guest]: building
[Guest]: statues and other things and not
[Guest]: everybody has to be working. So productivity
[Guest]: has to be high
[Guest]: and there has to be enough food produced
[Guest]: by not the 100% of the
[Guest]: population but only a smaller
[Guest]: percentage of the population so that the rest
[Guest]: of the people can do other things, right?
[Guest]: So it is not always
[Guest]: possible that you have such productivity
[Guest]: for example you know in Southeast Asia
[Guest]: there are people have been farming taro and
[Guest]: other tuber, other around
[Guest]: for a very long time but
[Guest]: that does not lead to the kind of
[Amit Varma]: productivity that cereal gives. So it is kind of
[Amit Varma]: the survivorship bias at play that these are the
[Amit Varma]: guys who did well and sort of expanded
[Amit Varma]: and became a civilization so now
[Guest]: we can look back and draw these conclusions.
[Guest]: No, it depends on
[Guest]: what kind of cereals you had. For example
[Guest]: we know that wherever cereal cultivation
[Guest]: and that I mean not always
[Guest]: some exceptions also.
[Guest]: So what kind of things were possible
[Guest]: for you to domesticate and cultivate
[Guest]: in the region that you were in is a
[Guest]: significant factor in saying
[Guest]: how successful it came to be.
[Guest]: It is possible that the earliest rice varieties
[Guest]: that we had were not
[Guest]: productive enough and that it had to be
[Guest]: hybridized with a newer variety
[Guest]: which happened we now know
[Guest]: from recent research
[Guest]: the Indica variety got hybridized
[Guest]: with the Japonica variety of rice
[Guest]: around 4000 roughly
[Guest]: years ago in India
[Guest]: and it is possible that led to a huge
[Guest]: increase in productivity. So
[Guest]: some of these are developments
[Guest]: that you can't foresee
[Guest]: and so that's why you did not
[Guest]: have a rice based civilization
[Guest]: possibly because it was not
[Guest]: and you also need for the civilization to
[Guest]: take off initially. It's not just
[Guest]: agriculture. You have to have an agricultural
[Guest]: package of multiple crops
[Guest]: along with a package
[Guest]: of domesticated animals.
[Guest]: So all of these
[Guest]: things has to be available for you
[Guest]: to be using them and
[Guest]: it's not possible that all regions have it. In some
[Guest]: regions you may not find the exact
[Guest]: solution to the problem
[Guest]: but yes but broadly it is
[Guest]: correct. Once you have productivity
[Guest]: happening and
[Guest]: it's also important that there has to be
[Guest]: institutions that can
[Guest]: take that
[Guest]: productivity and
[Guest]: use that productivity to
[Guest]: direct labor to
[Amit Varma]: other activities productively.
[Amit Varma]: Which would also be a sign of the evolving
[Guest]: culture I guess. It is
[Guest]: my book goes into in detail on how
[Unknown]: it happened in Uruk, the
[Guest]: first city and the fascinating
[Guest]: thing is that it happened initially
[Guest]: because they had to be
[Guest]: I mean it's a long story
[Guest]: but the interesting thing is
[Guest]: that when the productivity starts going
[Guest]: up
[Guest]: what you see is not increasing
[Guest]: prosperity, not that people's homes
[Guest]: start growing bigger
[Guest]: or that they have greater, you can
[Guest]: see they stay as they have
[Guest]: always been but there is one thing
[Guest]: whose size and opulence
[Guest]: does increase as productivity
[Guest]: increases and those are the temples
[Guest]: the Sigurads and
[Guest]: which shows you what
[Guest]: was the institution
[Guest]: that was coordinating
[Guest]: the activities necessary to bring out
[Guest]: higher productivity including building
[Guest]: canals and having new ways
[Guest]: and therefore who was appropriating
[Guest]: a lot of the surplus
[Guest]: while also providing
[Guest]: some of the surplus into the building of
[Guest]: new kinds of cities or organizations
[Guest]: so you have some insight into how that
[Amit Varma]: The elites with their false religions
[Amit Varma]: Correct
[Amit Varma]: So that journey from
[Amit Varma]: Mehrgarh to Harappa is like
[Amit Varma]: 4400 years approximately as you say
[Amit Varma]: in your book, 7000 BC to
[Amit Varma]: 2600 BC and we know
[Amit Varma]: the Harappans lasted from about 2600
[Amit Varma]: BC to 1900
[Amit Varma]: BC. Tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Harappa, I mean what kind of a civilization
[Guest]: was it? First thing
[Guest]: it was the largest civilization of its time
[Guest]: which we do not often realize
[Guest]: as big as Egyptian
[Guest]: and Mesopotamian civilizations
[Guest]: put together both in terms of
[Guest]: area and in terms of
[Guest]: of the number of people
[Guest]: of the population. Today
[Guest]: in terms of area it would be
[Guest]: about one third the size of India that
[Guest]: is today
[Guest]: and it had
[Guest]: a fair degree of standardization
[Guest]: in its mature phase
[Guest]: across a large number
[Guest]: of things, the kind of seals it had
[Guest]: the kind of language
[Guest]: that may have been used because
[Guest]: that still
[Guest]: my book talks about what the language could have
[Guest]: been. The imagery on the seals
[Guest]: that we talk about, the way the cities
[Guest]: were built, so there are
[Guest]: a lot of similarities and the size of the
[Guest]: bricks, the weights that were used
[Guest]: so you can see lots of things
[Guest]: that have been standardized
[Guest]: across that larger
[Guest]: region and mind you this is
[Guest]: before there is modern communication
[Guest]: transport any of these things
[Guest]: it's quite mind-boggling
[Guest]: to think about how that was accomplished
[Guest]: over in that period
[Guest]: and one of the striking
[Guest]: things about the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: you know especially when you consider
[Guest]: it with the West Asian civilization
[Guest]: the Mesopotamian civilization with which
[Guest]: we had always had strong
[Guest]: trade and other contacts
[Guest]: we were always in contact but despite
[Guest]: that the differences are so striking
[Guest]: I mean in the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: there are no large statues
[Guest]: of kings and you know
[Guest]: there is nobody deified as
[Amit Varma]: kings of
[Amit Varma]: no temples as well
[Guest]: no temples as well
[Guest]: so even the sculptures that we have from the Harappa
[Guest]: you would be surprised at how small they are, when you actually see them
[Guest]: that's not the imagery that you had
[Guest]: you thought they were much bigger, they are actually quite small
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: another striking thing again
[Guest]: there are no images
[Guest]: of human on human
[Guest]: violence except for one seal
[Guest]: somewhere which also
[Guest]: shows a woman being flanked on two sides
[Guest]: with two men who are
[Guest]: with their spears
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: angled at each other, which has multiple fascinating
[Guest]: interpretations you mentioned in your book
[Guest]: so except that
[Guest]: seal there is no imagery of human
[Guest]: on human violence, there is human on animal
[Guest]: violence, human on super human
[Guest]: all kinds of things
[Guest]: which is quite unlike other civilizations
[Guest]: like in West Asia where you can often
[Guest]: see wars being
[Guest]: and conquests all being
[Guest]: valorized and displayed in
[Guest]: imagery, we don't have royal
[Guest]: burials which are full
[Guest]: of you know, some king has been buried
[Guest]: along with huge amounts of treasures
[Guest]: and things like, we don't
[Guest]: burials are not very
[Guest]: surprising, there are some personal
[Guest]: possessions
[Guest]: that may include some jewellery also
[Guest]: and some food for their after
[Guest]: journey I suppose
[Guest]: so that's it
[Guest]: which is stunning, it is not that
[Guest]: especially considering the fact
[Guest]: that a lot of the jewellery in the Mesopotamian
[Guest]: civilizations were jewellery that were built
[Guest]: were made in the higher up civilization
[Guest]: and then sent there, so it is not that
[Guest]: we knew, we were actually making
[Guest]: money from it, we just didn't think it
[Guest]: made sense for it to be
[Amit Varma]: buried in royal chambers
[Guest]: so these are just some of the differences
[Guest]: between the uniqueness of the
[Guest]: civilization and just as
[Guest]: there are no large temples
[Guest]: or ostentatious
[Guest]: palaces and burials
[Guest]: but you do see
[Guest]: such investments going into public
[Guest]: conveniences which you do not see in other
[Guest]: in the West Asian
[Guest]: civilizations, for example
[Guest]: the sewage system, the roads
[Guest]: the facilities for visitors to
[Guest]: cities from water and
[Guest]: so all of that my book describes in detail
[Guest]: so there is a lot more attention
[Guest]: and money spent on public
[Guest]: conveniences than on
[Guest]: private
[Guest]: so that's our
[Amit Varma]: tradition. And it also
[Amit Varma]: fascinates me that at that point they must have
[Amit Varma]: evolved traditions of
[Amit Varma]: governance and so
[Amit Varma]: on, which took a long
[Amit Varma]: long time to actually re-emerge in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian subcontinent, so it's not just
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the scale of the cities
[Amit Varma]: and the city planning and the ambition of
[Amit Varma]: all of that, that took a long time to re-emerge
[Amit Varma]: but they very obviously could not have done this
[Amit Varma]: without evolved systems of governance
[Amit Varma]: and if you don't have big temples and
[Amit Varma]: gods and all that, then
[Amit Varma]: it's like a republic of men, it seems
[Guest]: so modern. We can't today guess, if you
[Guest]: assume that the lack of symbols means
[Guest]: temples were not the authority structures
[Guest]: brought all these things together, then who
[Guest]: were it? Yeah, it's a surprising
[Guest]: thing, but there was an interesting point that was
[Guest]: made by one of the historians, which my book also
[Guest]: talks about, is that if you go
[Guest]: to one of the palaces of the
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: Travancore royals, it does not really
[Guest]: look like a palace, it looks like an
[Guest]: interesting house. So it's possible
[Guest]: that we may not recognize
[Guest]: a palace or
[Guest]: a temple, but that's
[Amit Varma]: unlikely I think. Which would also
[Amit Varma]: if that is the case, be a cultural value
[Amit Varma]: that passed through the genes, because the Travancore
[Amit Varma]: royals would, in a sense, be descendants
[Amit Varma]: of the Harappans, right?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the Harappans, where did they
[Amit Varma]: come from? Like, are they from West Asia?
[Amit Varma]: What is
[Amit Varma]: the role of the early Indians in this, so
[Amit Varma]: to say, who are till this point the original
[Guest]: inhabitants? What's going on here?
[Guest]: My book calls the people who came
[Guest]: out of Africa, migrants, who arrived here around
[Guest]: 65,000 years ago and their descendants
[Guest]: as the first Indians. The Harappans
[Guest]: are a mixture of first Indians
[Guest]: and West Asians who arrived
[Guest]: from roughly the Saghros region of
[Guest]: Iran, around 9,000
[Guest]: years ago or earlier,
[Guest]: and they mixed with
[Guest]: the first Indians, who
[Guest]: may have already been experimenting
[Guest]: with agriculture in places like Mehrgarh, for
[Guest]: all you know, but this mixed population,
[Guest]: it is clear that they catalyzed the
[Guest]: agricultural transition across
[Guest]: the entire region and then
[Guest]: laid the foundation. So we now know
[Guest]: the clear answer to who were the Harappans.
[Guest]: The Harappans were a mixture of the
[Guest]: first Indians and
[Guest]: West Asian agriculturalists who moved in
[Amit Varma]: here around 9,000
[Amit Varma]: years ago. And population genetics absolutely
[Guest]: establishes that now. Yes,
[Guest]: this is based on
[Guest]: ancient DNA evidence, which
[Guest]: again talks in detail, which
[Guest]: shows that the Harappan
[Guest]: civilization, this was the mixture of
[Guest]: the Harappan civilization and I understand
[Guest]: this is the finding that is coming from
[Guest]: the Rakhi Gadi DNA, which is
[Amit Varma]: yet to be published as well.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and given that
[Amit Varma]: the Harappan script has yet to be
[Amit Varma]: deciphered, as you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: you know, in this age of computers
[Amit Varma]: and AI and all, it's probably only a matter of
[Amit Varma]: time, but given that it's yet to be
[Amit Varma]: deciphered, what assumptions can
[Amit Varma]: we make about their language
[Amit Varma]: and the possible successors to that
[Guest]: language? What is
[Guest]: really surprising is that
[Guest]: even before the Harappan
[Guest]: civilization, forget about the new
[Guest]: discoveries, even before the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: was discovered, anyone knew
[Guest]: that there is such a thing as the Harappan civilization,
[Guest]: there has been suggestions
[Guest]: by linguists of
[Guest]: links between Dravidian languages
[Guest]: and the language of
[Guest]: the Elamite, which is today an extinct
[Guest]: language, but which was spoken by
[Guest]: in Elam, which is in the Zagros
[Guest]: region of Iran and
[Guest]: close to the Mesopotamian
[Guest]: region, and that these
[Guest]: two languages are much in common is an idea
[Guest]: that predates the
[Guest]: discovery of the Harappan civilization.
[Guest]: But there's
[Guest]: no way of, you can prove it, it has
[Guest]: always been, papers written, these
[Guest]: are the links, this is connected, this
[Guest]: language is like this in
[Guest]: these areas.
[Guest]: Now what we have found
[Guest]: is that first, the archaeological
[Guest]: discoveries in Mehrgarh
[Guest]: and the Jarij, who is the archaeologist
[Guest]: who led the discoveries in his paper
[Guest]: which my book quotes, talks
[Guest]: about the similarities,
[Guest]: the surprising similarities
[Guest]: between Mehrgarh and regions
[Guest]: of Zagros region in Iran
[Guest]: where also archaeologists had
[Guest]: found early settlements
[Guest]: and the similarities are stunning
[Guest]: in terms of the house designs,
[Guest]: in terms of the first pottery
[Guest]: that is made, you know, with bitumen
[Guest]: and things like that. So there is a
[Guest]: range of similarities between the two
[Guest]: which he is surprised, he talks about
[Guest]: in his paper. So archaeologically
[Guest]: now, linguistically
[Guest]: there has always been a suggestion of a link.
[Guest]: Archaeology has linked Mehrgarh
[Guest]: with Zagros region
[Guest]: of Iran and now genetics
[Guest]: has gone further
[Guest]: and said there is indeed
[Guest]: migration of people from the Zagros
[Guest]: region of Iran, roughly that region of
[Guest]: West Asia into India
[Guest]: and who mixed with the first
[Guest]: Indians to form the...
[Guest]: So you have now evidence from multiple
[Guest]: places offer links
[Guest]: between these two regions.
[Guest]: Now, what is the link?
[Guest]: Is it possible?
[Guest]: We know that the Indo-European languages
[Guest]: arrived in India only much later,
[Guest]: in the period between 4000
[Guest]: to 3000 years ago.
[Guest]: So what is likely to happen in the language of the
[Guest]: Harappans in that period?
[Guest]: There are two, three things that one can
[Guest]: possibly say. One is that
[Guest]: it's too large a region, it couldn't happen.
[Guest]: Even today in that region there are many, many languages
[Guest]: and it couldn't happen in one language,
[Guest]: it must happen in multiple languages. Yes, that's true.
[Guest]: But it is possible that there was still one dominant
[Guest]: language because there is uniformity
[Guest]: in seals. Seals are writings
[Guest]: and those writings are in
[Guest]: a particular way, they don't change radically.
[Guest]: If a script is used to
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: used for one language and then used
[Guest]: in another language like the Harappan script
[Guest]: has been used in, it is used in
[Guest]: West Asia for example, in trading
[Guest]: and things like that. We can see the
[Guest]: sequence of words changes
[Guest]: because it's a different language.
[Guest]: Across the sites of the Harappan sites
[Guest]: the sequence is
[Guest]: consistent. So it suggests
[Guest]: that there is at least for trading purposes
[Guest]: so at least for administrative
[Guest]: purposes there is some kind of language that is
[Guest]: used as common.
[Guest]: Now what language that
[Guest]: could be? It's a civilization that survived
[Guest]: for 700 years
[Guest]: and it
[Guest]: has to have left
[Guest]: a significant mark on the Indian
[Guest]: culture. And the language that could
[Guest]: fit the bill is the Dravidian languages
[Guest]: which are today spoken by about
[Guest]: 20% of the people of
[Guest]: India and which is
[Guest]: also linked to Brahui language
[Guest]: which is today spoken by
[Guest]: the Brahui in the north western parts
[Guest]: of which is today in Pakistan.
[Guest]: So the idea that
[Guest]: Elamite and Dravidian are
[Guest]: linked has now been
[Guest]: revived in the light of
[Guest]: comes back with much stronger
[Guest]: force in the light of new
[Guest]: discoveries of that link Elam
[Guest]: to India. So the
[Guest]: first time that these
[Guest]: suggestions were made that there are
[Guest]: similarities between the two languages
[Guest]: they were dealt with skepticism
[Guest]: for multiple reasons.
[Guest]: One of the reasons being that
[Guest]: the earliest proto-Dravidian
[Guest]: suggests not Harappan
[Guest]: like cities but more like
[Guest]: herding situations.
[Guest]: But that's not surprising
[Guest]: if you assume that the earliest
[Guest]: introduction of
[Guest]: Dravidian languages as we
[Guest]: discussed earlier, the people who came
[Guest]: from Zagros region to Harappa
[Guest]: were not necessarily agriculturists
[Guest]: but were herders
[Guest]: who may have been exposed to
[Guest]: the developing culture of agriculture in
[Guest]: Mesopotamia but were themselves
[Guest]: nomadic herders.
[Guest]: So if that they came some of them
[Guest]: might have settled down to agriculture
[Guest]: and then went on to create but even now
[Guest]: there are nomadic, Brahui themselves are
[Guest]: nomads and
[Guest]: pastoralists. So there are
[Guest]: not all the people who came may have settled
[Guest]: down to farming and then went on to
[Guest]: create the Harappans. Some of them may have been
[Guest]: pastoralists and it is possible that
[Guest]: it is pastoralists who brought
[Guest]: Dravidian languages of Harappa
[Guest]: down to South India first.
[Guest]: The common assumption
[Guest]: that the Harappan languages
[Guest]: or Dravidian languages reached India
[Guest]: after the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: fell apart and they moved down south
[Guest]: need not be the case.
[Guest]: It is possible that it is
[Guest]: this pastoralists who brought down
[Guest]: and we have evidence
[Guest]: from archaeobotany and
[Guest]: other things of the
[Guest]: how the first
[Guest]: agricultural package
[Guest]: which includes both millets and pulses
[Guest]: and a domesticated animal.
[Guest]: The domesticated animal was brought into
[Guest]: South India from the north.
[Guest]: So it is possible
[Guest]: that it is this pastoralists who brought
[Guest]: it into the south and
[Guest]: that is the first
[Guest]: bringing of Dravidian
[Guest]: languages into South India
[Guest]: and it might have been pastoralist at
[Guest]: that time. So I am saying many of the
[Guest]: old questions that
[Guest]: challenged the idea of a
[Guest]: Dravidian language in Harappan
[Guest]: may now have new answers
[Guest]: based on new findings
[Guest]: as well as
[Guest]: possibilities like that that have now become
[Amit Varma]: evident. So before we get to
[Amit Varma]: the Aryan migration which happens
[Amit Varma]: after this, just to kind of
[Amit Varma]: sum it up, some of
[Amit Varma]: the story of the link
[Amit Varma]: between Mehrgarh and Harappa
[Amit Varma]: all the way to South India and
[Amit Varma]: obviously what we are now beginning to realize
[Amit Varma]: is that South Indians in a sense are the
[Amit Varma]: descendants of the Harappans. Where did they go?
[Amit Varma]: They came south and the story really
[Amit Varma]: is that you have these pastoralist
[Amit Varma]: migrants from West Asia, from Zagros
[Amit Varma]: and so on, coming, perhaps settling
[Amit Varma]: in Mehrgarh where agriculture starts and
[Amit Varma]: that starts booming and there are various experiments
[Amit Varma]: and then you probably have a
[Amit Varma]: like you said luck being involved, a perfect
[Amit Varma]: storm of circumstances and from that cities
[Amit Varma]: evolve and productivity
[Amit Varma]: goes up, cities evolve, cultures evolve
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth and eventually
[Amit Varma]: of course the Harappan civilization
[Amit Varma]: as we know lasted between 2600 and
[Amit Varma]: 1900 but even
[Amit Varma]: while it was on and perhaps after it's
[Amit Varma]: declined, you have all of those guys
[Amit Varma]: coming down and settling in
[Amit Varma]: South India and there
[Amit Varma]: is evidence of that genetically of course
[Amit Varma]: it's pretty much confirmed
[Amit Varma]: through archeology and all that, it's there
[Amit Varma]: and now you are saying that even
[Amit Varma]: linguistically there is coming to be
[Amit Varma]: this strong belief that the modern
[Amit Varma]: Dravidian languages like Tamil, Malayalam
[Amit Varma]: and so on originated from
[Guest]: there. Yeah, I would make
[Guest]: some, when the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: started declining, people moved
[Amit Varma]: obviously. And it was already
[Guest]: by then a mix of Zagrosian and
[Guest]: early India as you are saying. And they
[Guest]: have moved both, they are moving
[Guest]: from North-Western India right, so moved
[Guest]: East to what is today North India
[Guest]: and South to what is today
[Guest]: South India. So in a
[Guest]: sense the Harappans are ancestors
[Guest]: to both North Indians
[Guest]: and South Indians, both in a
[Guest]: genetic sense and in a cultural
[Guest]: sense because they carried with them many
[Guest]: practices, beliefs of the
[Guest]: Harappan traditions with them to both these
[Guest]: regions. The only difference is
[Guest]: that they would have brought their languages
[Guest]: also to both these regions, North India
[Guest]: as well as South India, but later
[Guest]: migrations of Indo-European
[Guest]: language speaking people from
[Guest]: Central Asia overly
[Guest]: or displaced. There was a language shift that
[Guest]: happened in North India from
[Guest]: Dravidian languages to Indo-European
[Guest]: languages. That shift did
[Guest]: not happen in South
[Guest]: India where the language still
[Guest]: continues. So the difference between
[Guest]: North India and South India is that
[Guest]: as regards to Harappan is that the
[Guest]: linguistic heritage of
[Guest]: Harappa is with the South
[Guest]: Indians, but the cultural and genetic
[Guest]: heritage of the Harappans
[Guest]: are both in the South
[Guest]: and in the North. In a sense
[Guest]: the Harappans are in many
[Guest]: ways the glue that holds
[Guest]: us together because
[Guest]: it has left such
[Guest]: an imprint on the cultural practices
[Guest]: today because if you build houses
[Guest]: around courtyards today,
[Guest]: that's the way houses were built in the Harappan tradition.
[Guest]: So many many factors
[Guest]: that you today take for granted,
[Guest]: we may not realize that they actually come from
[Guest]: the imprints that have been left
[Guest]: behind by the Harappan civilization.
[Guest]: If many of the things that we today
[Guest]: see as continuities between
[Guest]: different parts of the region
[Guest]: could owe their beginnings
[Guest]: to what people did
[Amit Varma]: in the Harappan civilization.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as you pointed out, even
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit and even some of what we know
[Amit Varma]: as a Vedic culture has
[Amit Varma]: imprints of Harappan civilization
[Amit Varma]: and you've detailed some of it in your
[Amit Varma]: book. Let's talk about the Aryan migrations
[Amit Varma]: now. It is clear that, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: there is this term called Indo-Proto-European and you
[Amit Varma]: kind of know that there is a much commonality
[Amit Varma]: between, for example,
[Amit Varma]: that set of languages
[Amit Varma]: which come from Sanskrit and
[Amit Varma]: the European languages
[Amit Varma]: and until recently there were
[Amit Varma]: sort of two schools of thought and there were people
[Amit Varma]: who would say that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: the migration could have happened in any
[Amit Varma]: direction. It isn't necessary that
[Amit Varma]: they came here. Maybe it originated here
[Amit Varma]: and we went there. But as you point out in
[Amit Varma]: your book, the new science
[Amit Varma]: has decided that question
[Guest]: decisively. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: The new science is ancient DNA, but
[Guest]: before ancient DNA, there's
[Guest]: a simple way to answer it, right?
[Guest]: Indo-European languages, the family
[Guest]: of languages are spread from Iceland
[Guest]: to India. India forms
[Guest]: the eastern most area in
[Guest]: which Indo-European languages are
[Guest]: spoken. There's no community of people
[Guest]: towards the east of India
[Guest]: that speaks Indo-European languages.
[Guest]: So how did
[Guest]: the language come to be
[Guest]: spread as it is? For India
[Guest]: as well as for any other region, the only answer
[Guest]: is either somebody else brought it in there
[Guest]: or it went from this region to the rest of the world.
[Guest]: Those are the only two answers.
[Guest]: Now if it went from India
[Guest]: to the rest of the world, there should
[Guest]: be a signal of that
[Guest]: movement genetically,
[Guest]: meaning you should be able to see.
[Guest]: Remember, we are talking about
[Guest]: even today, we know that
[Guest]: the ancestry of all Indians
[Guest]: in almost all populations carry
[Guest]: 50-65% of
[Guest]: first Indian ancestry. No
[Guest]: matter where in the caste hierarchy you are,
[Guest]: no matter what language you speak, no matter
[Guest]: which region you inhabit,
[Guest]: you are likely, if
[Guest]: this applies to most Indian population groups,
[Guest]: you carry between 50-65%.
[Amit Varma]: And much more in the case of the Andaman
[Guest]: residents who, as you pointed out, are probably
[Guest]: the less
[Guest]: purest descendants.
[Guest]: So that is the ancestry of the
[Guest]: first Indians.
[Guest]: So if there was indeed
[Guest]: a large migration that took
[Guest]: these languages from India to the rest of the world,
[Guest]: you should see a trail
[Guest]: of first Indian ancestry
[Guest]: going from India
[Guest]: to the rest of the world. In the genome.
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: we know that first Indians
[Guest]: are by and large, they don't have close
[Guest]: relatives anywhere else in the world.
[Guest]: Because the people who
[Guest]: went, their descendants who went on to
[Guest]: populate the rest of the world
[Guest]: 65,000 years ago,
[Guest]: that happened so long ago, that they are
[Guest]: no longer close relatives because
[Guest]: they spread apart so long ago.
[Guest]: So today, if you
[Guest]: ask any geneticist, he would say first Indians
[Guest]: ancestry is
[Guest]: South Asian and it doesn't have to have close relatives
[Guest]: outside. Now, there is
[Guest]: an exception to this rule that proves
[Guest]: the case. The exception is that of a
[Guest]: community called Roma, who were earlier called
[Guest]: Gypsies. Everybody knows
[Guest]: that the Roma came from India
[Guest]: around 1,500 years ago
[Guest]: and they spread from India, northwestern India
[Guest]: and then spread out. And there are
[Guest]: millions of them today in Europe as well as
[Guest]: in the Americas.
[Guest]: So if you, and the
[Guest]: recent studies that have been done on the
[Guest]: DNA of the Roma
[Guest]: shows that their
[Guest]: empty DNA or mitochondrial DNA
[Guest]: suggests that they do.
[Guest]: The signal of the first Indian is
[Guest]: there. A haplogroup called M2
[Guest]: which is the most common haplogroup
[Guest]: in India today
[Guest]: and that signal is there. But this
[Guest]: is an exception. They couldn't have spread
[Guest]: into European languages
[Guest]: to the rest of the world because that happened
[Guest]: only in 1,500
[Guest]: years ago roughly, in historical
[Guest]: time, not prehistorically. So this
[Guest]: is a strong
[Guest]: instance, one strong reason
[Guest]: to say that out of India is untenable.
[Guest]: The theory that
[Guest]: Indo-European languages went from out of
[Guest]: India to the rest of the world is untenable
[Guest]: because there is no evidence to support it.
[Guest]: The second factor
[Guest]: is that out of India has always
[Guest]: in recent times has been an angry
[Guest]: retort to suggestions of
[Guest]: this is how Indo-European languages spread
[Guest]: but it has never been
[Guest]: fleshed out. There is not a
[Guest]: single paper that
[Guest]: says this is how it happened.
[Guest]: This is the period when it happened.
[Guest]: This is the routes that they took and this is how
[Guest]: they spread across the rest of the world. There is no
[Guest]: scientific paper
[Guest]: that lays out the case for out of India.
[Guest]: It has always been a single
[Guest]: retort, rhetorical answer
[Guest]: to the idea that this is how the Indo-European
[Guest]: languages spread across the world.
[Guest]: Now, what
[Guest]: has happened in recent times is
[Guest]: that ancient DNA
[Guest]: has proved there is significant
[Guest]: movement of people from Central Asian steppe
[Guest]: into Europe
[Guest]: around 5000 years ago
[Guest]: and into South Asia around
[Guest]: 1000 years later, around 4000 years
[Guest]: ago, between 4000 and 3000
[Guest]: years ago. And this
[Guest]: is what carried
[Guest]: Indo-European languages
[Guest]: into both regions.
[Guest]: How do we know this?
[Guest]: There are multiple answers to this.
[Amit Varma]: From the different disciplines.
[Guest]: From the different disciplines between archaeological
[Guest]: similarities and
[Guest]: the spread of the languages themselves
[Guest]: and to the fact that
[Guest]: today when you look at
[Guest]: steppe ancestry among Indians
[Guest]: you will see that it is
[Guest]: much higher, it is elevated levels
[Guest]: as one of the studies puts it,
[Guest]: recent studies. Steppe
[Guest]: ancestry is elevated in
[Guest]: those groups of people
[Guest]: who have been traditional custodians
[Guest]: of Sanskrit texts.
[Guest]: So, I think there is a multiplicity
[Guest]: of evidence
[Guest]: with suggesting the
[Guest]: link between the spread
[Guest]: of migrations into both
[Guest]: Europe and into South Asia
[Guest]: and the languages that they carried.
[Guest]: That's a perfect fit for the kind of
[Guest]: distribution of this family that we
[Amit Varma]: see across the world.
[Amit Varma]: So, continue the story for me. We have Harappa
[Amit Varma]: between 2600 and 1900 and then
[Amit Varma]: there is a decline. I mean, firstly
[Amit Varma]: what are the possible causes of the
[Amit Varma]: decline and what happens after that and
[Amit Varma]: secondly, you have the Aryan
[Amit Varma]: migration coming in sort of
[Amit Varma]: from the top and how is all of that
[Guest]: playing out?
[Guest]: You know, there was an earlier assumption that
[Guest]: the earliest version of, nobody
[Guest]: uses, nobody has used the Aryan
[Guest]: invasion theory for at least many many decades.
[Guest]: It's a straw man which has been put up
[Guest]: by those who do not like to
[Guest]: accept the idea that there has been migration.
[Guest]: But, when there was
[Guest]: the Aryan invasion theory was spoken
[Guest]: about in the very early,
[Guest]: you know, during when the Harappan civilization
[Guest]: was discovered, because then the
[Guest]: assumption was that what caused the decline
[Amit Varma]: was the arrival of the Aryans.
[Amit Varma]: When I was in school, I was distinctly, I remember
[Amit Varma]: I was taught the Aryan invasion theory.
[Guest]: So, this was when
[Guest]: they came about that they
[Guest]: destroyed civilization and that was the earliest
[Guest]: cause of the civilization,
[Guest]: decline of the civilization.
[Guest]: But this statement
[Guest]: made by the head of the
[Guest]: Indian Archaeological Survey, then a Britisher
[Guest]: who said Indra stands accused.
[Guest]: He himself
[Guest]: withdrew that statement
[Guest]: later saying that
[Guest]: that's not the evidence because
[Guest]: for different reasons, for reasons such that
[Guest]: the dating of the Vedas were much
[Guest]: later, so they couldn't have come around the time
[Guest]: when, so for a variety of reasons.
[Guest]: But the person who made the accusation himself
[Guest]: retracted it. There has been
[Guest]: no archaeological evidence to support
[Guest]: that the sites
[Guest]: of the Harappan civilization were
[Guest]: destroyed by invading
[Guest]: armies. And for
[Guest]: many years now, the evidence has been
[Guest]: accumulating that it's a
[Guest]: long drought that caused
[Guest]: the decline of not just
[Guest]: Harappan civilization, but many other
[Guest]: civilizations around the same time.
[Guest]: To the extent that there is
[Guest]: now a new age is being
[Guest]: defined, my book talks about it, it's called the
[Guest]: Meghalayan age, Meghalayan age because
[Guest]: the proof for this long
[Guest]: drought was discovered from
[Guest]: geological formations in
[Guest]: Meghalaya, but it's being called
[Guest]: the Meghalayan age to describe
[Guest]: this new period that began with
[Guest]: the long drought. So it's
[Guest]: not clear that it is climatic factors that
[Guest]: were the major factor,
[Guest]: major cause of the decline of the Harappan
[Guest]: civilization, though other things, as
[Guest]: is always the case, other things might have
[Guest]: added to it later on, including
[Guest]: migrations as possible.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah. And then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, once the Aryan comes, there's also
[Amit Varma]: besides the genetic interminglings, there's cultural
[Amit Varma]: interminglings, like
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out, you know, a lot of Harappan
[Amit Varma]: culture is reflected in
[Amit Varma]: what we call Vedic culture and
[Amit Varma]: assumed to be, you know, something pure that
[Amit Varma]: originated out of itself, sui
[Amit Varma]: generis, as it were, but there are
[Amit Varma]: influences of Harappa. There are influences of
[Amit Varma]: Harappa on the language, Sanskrit
[Guest]: itself. Yes. The earliest versions
[Guest]: of Sanskrit that we have
[Guest]: already has what is called
[Guest]: retroflex consonants in it, like ta,
[Guest]: na, these are
[Guest]: consonants, these are sounds that you have to make by
[Guest]: curling your tongue and striking your palate.
[Guest]: And this is, retroflex
[Guest]: consonants are not there in other Indo-European
[Guest]: language families, not even in
[Guest]: Persian, which is the closest that you
[Guest]: can find. But it is there in Sanskrit,
[Guest]: in the earliest Sanskrit. So
[Guest]: why is it there? It is there
[Guest]: because retroflex consonants have
[Guest]: been a common factor
[Guest]: across many earlier South Asian
[Guest]: languages, including Dravidian.
[Guest]: So, it's clearly
[Guest]: a sign of the
[Guest]: influence on the earliest
[Guest]: Sanskrit that
[Guest]: we have, that it has
[Guest]: retroflex consonants that other Indo-European
[Guest]: languages mostly do not have. There might be one
[Guest]: or two exceptions, but by and large, they
[Guest]: don't have. And the striking thing is even Persian
[Guest]: doesn't have. And if you look
[Guest]: at, and my
[Guest]: book says that there is a
[Guest]: disconnect between the Harappan
[Guest]: civilization and what its concerns
[Guest]: and images were.
[Guest]: And the earliest texts,
[Guest]: Vedic texts, such as
[Guest]: the Rig Veda,
[Guest]: and over time you can see that
[Guest]: disconnect disappears. Such as?
[Guest]: Give me some example. For example,
[Guest]: take the case of
[Guest]: the Rig Veda speaks poorly
[Guest]: of phallus worshippers,
[Guest]: Shishnadeva. Right.
[Guest]: And it doesn't want
[Guest]: those people to be associated or come anywhere
[Guest]: near Lord Indra and
[Guest]: they really dislike them.
[Guest]: But there is evidence, archaeologists
[Guest]: have excavated places like Taula Vida,
[Guest]: R.S. Bisht, for example,
[Guest]: talks about how there is significant
[Guest]: evidence of phallus
[Guest]: worship, not just in Taula Vida, but in other
[Guest]: Harappan cities as well.
[Guest]: So, that's a disconnect.
[Guest]: Disconnect between what the Rig Veda says and what
[Guest]: you can see as a practice in the Harappan
[Guest]: civilization. But that disconnect
[Guest]: goes later, because
[Guest]: the objection to phallus
[Guest]: worship is not something that sustains,
[Guest]: that goes away.
[Guest]: You can see in the Harappan civilization,
[Guest]: you can see many images, or even
[Guest]: one seal, which is so strikingly
[Guest]: similar to a yogic position.
[Guest]: We don't know whether it was a yogic position,
[Guest]: but you can't deny the fact that it is.
[Guest]: This sounds very
[Guest]: familiar to you. And not
[Guest]: only the seal, there are also many other
[Guest]: small artifacts which remind you
[Guest]: of yoga
[Guest]: or yogic things. But in the earliest
[Guest]: parts of the Vedic texts, there's no mention
[Guest]: of yoga. But by the time you come
[Guest]: to the later parts, later
[Guest]: compositions, you can see
[Guest]: clear evidence of it.
[Guest]: So, there are multiple levels at
[Guest]: which you can see, like
[Guest]: it happens everywhere.
[Guest]: You can see that there is an intermingling of cultures.
[Guest]: There's adoption,
[Guest]: there's adaption, both
[Guest]: happening as the newcomers
[Guest]: mingle with the already existing
[Guest]: settled populations of
[Guest]: the Harappans in the area.
[Guest]: So, you have to see
[Guest]: the Indian culture has
[Guest]: draws from multiple, it doesn't come from
[Guest]: a single source as we have often imagined.
[Guest]: It comes from multiple
[Guest]: sources. It has put together,
[Guest]: just as genetically, we are a combination
[Guest]: of four major prehistoric
[Guest]: migrations that happened.
[Guest]: There are other migrations too, but nothing
[Guest]: left us big and imprint us these four
[Amit Varma]: migrations. Which are these four?
[Amit Varma]: The Out of Africa migrations that we talked about,
[Guest]: the West Asians that we
[Guest]: talked about. There's a third one
[Guest]: which we haven't talked about, which is
[Guest]: there's a migration from East Asia that happened
[Guest]: around 4000 to 3500
[Guest]: years ago, which brought
[Guest]: Austro-Asiatic languages such as
[Guest]: Khasi, Mundari, etc.
[Guest]: which are spoken by tribals in
[Guest]: Central India and Eastern India.
[Guest]: India actually has four
[Guest]: major large language
[Guest]: families. Of course, Indo-European which is
[Guest]: spoken by three-fourths of the
[Guest]: people, Dravidian languages,
[Guest]: Austro-Asiatic languages
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: Tibeto-Burman languages. This is not including
[Guest]: the Andamanese languages which are a separate one.
[Guest]: There are also one or two isolates.
[Guest]: So of this, the four
[Guest]: Indo-European, Dravidian,
[Guest]: Indo-European we spoke about, Dravidian we
[Guest]: spoke about, Austro-Asiatic
[Guest]: came from East Asia.
[Guest]: Tibeto-Burman obviously is a part of
[Guest]: the language family. That also came as part
[Guest]: of migration but it's a very small population
[Guest]: in, smaller than
[Amit Varma]: even the Austro-Asiatic.
[Amit Varma]: And what was fascinating and very
[Amit Varma]: apt to me and even moving is your
[Amit Varma]: use of the Pisa analogy
[Amit Varma]: where you describe sort of
[Amit Varma]: India as, you know, to think of
[Amit Varma]: it as a Pisa. Just can you expand on
[Guest]: that? Yeah, it came
[Guest]: quite accidentally when a
[Guest]: friend of mine
[Guest]: who knew what I
[Guest]: was writing on wanted to
[Guest]: know how I would describe
[Guest]: his state's population
[Guest]: as a mixture of what and what.
[Guest]: So it was in the context of
[Guest]: trying to explain it to him that
[Guest]: the Pisa analogy came to me that
[Guest]: but when I thought
[Guest]: about it, I thought, you know, this is just a
[Guest]: this doesn't sound like a good
[Guest]: one. I'm sure I'll be able to find a better
[Guest]: metaphor later on
[Guest]: but as it stands, I have never been
[Amit Varma]: able to find a metaphor. It's a fantastic metaphor.
[Amit Varma]: So just expand on it.
[Guest]: So the
[Guest]: base of the Pisa
[Guest]: are the first Indians
[Guest]: or the first Indian ancestry that forms
[Guest]: 50 to 65 percent of
[Guest]: the ancestry of most Indian population
[Amit Varma]: groups. That came 65,000 years ago
[Guest]: from out of Africa.
[Guest]: And this is a striking, which we did not
[Guest]: know earlier. In fact, we used
[Guest]: to ask out of Africa migrants
[Amit Varma]: where did they go?
[Guest]: It is true, of course, that you can see
[Guest]: them in
[Guest]: the Andaman Islands who did not
[Guest]: mix with people as all of us did.
[Guest]: But the first answer to the question
[Guest]: is look in the mirror.
[Guest]: 50 to 65 percent of the ancestry of
[Guest]: most Indian population groups first comes from
[Guest]: the first Indians. So that's the base. That's the
[Guest]: foundation. It also shows
[Guest]: that how wrong it is
[Guest]: for anyone to think as we often think
[Guest]: that the tribals, for example,
[Guest]: are somehow very different
[Guest]: and from the rest of the population.
[Guest]: That's not true. If we share,
[Guest]: if the rest of the population shares most with
[Guest]: anyone else, that's with the tribals. The tribals
[Guest]: are us. Us in inverted
[Guest]: commas. But
[Guest]: the point is that's the
[Guest]: so it's the wrong impression.
[Guest]: So the first Indians are
[Guest]: the foundation, are the base of the Indian
[Guest]: piece. That's what is unique about us
[Guest]: because there's nothing else like this
[Guest]: anywhere else in the world.
[Guest]: So if you want to say what's unique,
[Guest]: what makes us, anyone else look
[Guest]: Indians and say he is an Indian, I mean
[Guest]: Indian I use in the entire South Asian context.
[Guest]: This is the base that makes it
[Guest]: who is an Indian.
[Guest]: So I mean base not, I mean I'm
[Guest]: exaggerating is all of the rest.
[Guest]: So on the foundation is laid
[Guest]: the source. What's the source?
[Guest]: The source is the Harappans. How
[Guest]: come? Because the Harappans, when the
[Guest]: civilization declined, they spread
[Guest]: across the pizza.
[Guest]: Both North India
[Guest]: and South India, they are the ancestors of both.
[Guest]: And so that's
[Guest]: the source that has spread all over the pizza.
[Guest]: And then there is
[Guest]: the cheese, the
[Guest]: area. And they are not
[Guest]: spread uniformly. They are spread more in the
[Guest]: North, less in the South. But they are
[Guest]: there everywhere. So that's
[Guest]: the cheese you could say.
[Guest]: Then there are the toppings, which is both
[Guest]: the Austro-Asiatic and the Tibetan
[Guest]: and all the others who came later
[Guest]: who may not have left a large imprint
[Guest]: on our demography, but are still
[Guest]: makes the pizza what it is.
[Guest]: It will taste very differently if those
[Guest]: toppings were not there.
[Guest]: So that's the Indian
[Amit Varma]: population.
[Amit Varma]: And you know the other
[Amit Varma]: large and very welcome and
[Amit Varma]: gratifying conclusion of all of this science
[Amit Varma]: is that there is no such
[Amit Varma]: thing as races
[Amit Varma]: or racial purity or any of
[Amit Varma]: that. All of that is just conceptual
[Amit Varma]: nonsense. Because we are all
[Guest]: completely mixed. Absolutely.
[Guest]: Conceptual nonsense born out of
[Guest]: a need to
[Guest]: people have an innate need to create
[Guest]: identities and they need
[Guest]: you know classifications
[Guest]: and things to create those identities
[Guest]: that will set them apart from other
[Guest]: identities. But the reality is that the more you closely
[Guest]: look at them, they are not
[Guest]: black and white stories. All populations
[Guest]: are combinations. You cannot find a population that is
[Guest]: not a combination. Unless you suddenly
[Guest]: find that there is this population in Amazon
[Guest]: Forest somewhere who hasn't been in touch
[Guest]: with anybody for 50,000 years.
[Guest]: Well, it can't be 50,000 in the Amazon.
[Guest]: It has to be less than 16,000.
[Guest]: So that's impossible. So I'm saying somewhere
[Guest]: you find that there is an out-of-Africa
[Guest]: population that hasn't
[Guest]: mixed with anyone forever.
[Guest]: And then you can say, yeah, and that might
[Guest]: be very different. It must be a pure race. But
[Guest]: other than that, all populations are mixes
[Guest]: multiple times.
[Guest]: And one of the amazing things that
[Guest]: is now clear is that one
[Guest]: of the strong objections of people when you
[Guest]: look at Indians is the result
[Guest]: of four major population migrations
[Guest]: because they think that's why
[Guest]: are you taking, picking out India and
[Guest]: you know, why are you portraying India as
[Guest]: some peculiar case where there is multiple
[Guest]: migrations. This is not true. This is true
[Guest]: of all parts of the world.
[Guest]: This is true of all parts of
[Guest]: the world. Europe has seen its populations.
[Guest]: In fact, we have been less affected
[Guest]: by migrations
[Guest]: than other parts of the world because
[Guest]: most of the parts of the world in Europe, for example,
[Guest]: the first hunter-gatherer ancestry is
[Guest]: in single digits.
[Guest]: Why? Because there have been
[Guest]: there have been at least two major
[Guest]: migrations that completely
[Amit Varma]: changed the demography of Europe. So you'd say
[Amit Varma]: their pizza doesn't really have a base
[Guest]: per se. New base because
[Guest]: new migrants, the old base is
[Guest]: gone. Right. Or reduced
[Guest]: to single digits, except in North Europe
[Guest]: where there is a much larger percentage
[Guest]: of their, Northern
[Guest]: Europe has a much larger percentage of
[Guest]: their hunter-gatherers. So Europe
[Guest]: has seen at least two major migrations.
[Guest]: First around 9000
[Guest]: years ago from West Asia
[Guest]: again, not from the same region as Zagros, but from
[Guest]: Anatolia, that went
[Guest]: into taking farming into
[Guest]: Europe. And then around 5000
[Guest]: years ago, the same guys, or
[Guest]: close to the same guys who came here, who went
[Guest]: into Europe, taking Indo-European
[Guest]: languages, horse riding,
[Guest]: carriage driving,
[Guest]: masters of metallurgy,
[Guest]: the new, the step-pastelists
[Guest]: who went and
[Guest]: either mixed with the
[Guest]: existing Neolithic farmers in
[Guest]: Europe to some extent and replaced them to
[Guest]: a large extent. That's the story of Europe.
[Guest]: America, we know that even before the
[Guest]: Europeans came in, European story is a
[Guest]: different one. Even before the Europeans came in, there were at least
[Guest]: three major migrations from Asia
[Guest]: that populated the
[Guest]: Americas as they are. In East
[Guest]: Asia, we know that there are at least
[Guest]: two major migrations
[Guest]: that changed the entire demography of
[Guest]: East Asia. One of those bringing
[Guest]: is what brought in Austro-Asiatic
[Guest]: languages to India. The other one brought
[Guest]: Austronesian languages to many parts
[Guest]: of the Pacific Islands.
[Guest]: So, repeated
[Guest]: mass migrations
[Guest]: that changed demography is
[Guest]: not specific, is
[Guest]: not a speciality of South Asia.
[Guest]: In fact, it is
[Guest]: true of most regions
[Guest]: in the world. In Central Asia, for example,
[Guest]: it would be difficult to keep track
[Guest]: of the number
[Guest]: of times the migrations
[Guest]: have changed the demography
[Amit Varma]: of the region.
[Amit Varma]: Possibly the most fascinating chapter
[Amit Varma]: in your book for me was actually the epilogue
[Amit Varma]: where you sort of
[Amit Varma]: move on from the science and
[Amit Varma]: you look at some
[Amit Varma]: of the really new findings and you
[Amit Varma]: raise questions with them which you don't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily want to answer or
[Amit Varma]: go out of your way to answer. But it's important that
[Amit Varma]: those questions are being
[Amit Varma]: raised. And
[Amit Varma]: one of those questions is
[Amit Varma]: about caste. Where
[Amit Varma]: like you point out, the new science shows
[Amit Varma]: that the caste system really solidified
[Amit Varma]: around 100 CE.
[Amit Varma]: And as you say, it is not at
[Amit Varma]: all inevitable in a cultural sense
[Amit Varma]: that it was going to turn out that way because
[Amit Varma]: within Hinduism there were other
[Amit Varma]: competing traditions like
[Amit Varma]: Charvakas and Lokayuktas which were
[Amit Varma]: much more based on rationalism
[Amit Varma]: and not so hierarchical and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless the caste system
[Amit Varma]: came about. So what's the kind of evidence
[Amit Varma]: through which we know this that
[Amit Varma]: it became so endogamous and what are the consequences
[Guest]: of this? Yeah, as you said
[Guest]: the new information that we have now
[Guest]: which we did not have earlier
[Guest]: I mean before two years ago
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: endogamy which is a distinguishing
[Guest]: mark of the caste system of people marrying
[Guest]: within their community
[Guest]: did not begin until
[Guest]: about 100 CE
[Guest]: and that between, genetics
[Guest]: also says this, between around 4000
[Guest]: years ago
[Guest]: and the beginning of the common era
[Guest]: that's almost for 2000 years
[Guest]: 2000 BCE to
[Guest]: 100 CE, around 2000
[Guest]: years, there was
[Guest]: significant mixing between
[Guest]: different population groups
[Guest]: that's also a finding in the country
[Guest]: of the kind that has never been seen before
[Guest]: or later. Just
[Guest]: imagine all that happened.
[Guest]: If you were to ask yourself what is the most
[Guest]: tumultuous period in the history
[Guest]: of this
[Guest]: region, there would be no doubt
[Guest]: about what that period was. It is around
[Guest]: 2000 BCE to 100 CE
[Guest]: Why is that? Think of all that
[Guest]: happened. A long existing
[Guest]: civilization that had thrived
[Guest]: in its mature form alone for 700
[Guest]: years went away
[Guest]: the Harappan civilization slowly
[Guest]: but definitively went
[Guest]: away. New
[Guest]: migrants came from East Asia bringing
[Guest]: a new set of languages and perhaps new
[Guest]: farming practices. Another set
[Guest]: of migrants came from Central Asia
[Guest]: bringing warlike
[Guest]: bringing new languages
[Guest]: who are dominant and there is a language
[Guest]: shift that happens in Northern India
[Guest]: and in
[Guest]: this midst there is
[Guest]: major mixing between
[Guest]: different population groups that is going
[Guest]: on that is unheard of any
[Guest]: point of time because you have to remember
[Guest]: that by 4000 years ago
[Guest]: all the four major population
[Guest]: groups that would form
[Guest]: the foundation, that would form the Indian
[Guest]: demographic piece, they are all in
[Guest]: and for 2000 years there is significant
[Guest]: mixing that leaves no one
[Guest]: untouched. Today if you take
[Guest]: the most remote tribal
[Guest]: population, you would
[Guest]: still find that he
[Guest]: carries the ancestry of multiple populations
[Guest]: so that's the extent to which
[Guest]: the mixing happened because
[Amit Varma]: 2000 years is a very long time. We were the party
[Guest]: capital of those days.
[Guest]: The only people who escaped
[Guest]: it were the Andamanis
[Guest]: because they are actually physically cut
[Guest]: off from the rest of the mainland and they don't know what is going
[Guest]: on there. But this
[Guest]: suddenly comes to an end.
[Guest]: Not suddenly, it may have happened over a period
[Guest]: of time but around
[Guest]: 100 CE it comes to an end
[Guest]: and this is counterintuitive
[Guest]: right because you can easily
[Guest]: imagine people
[Guest]: who are, you know, so far
[Guest]: decided to stay separately, deciding
[Guest]: one day, hey this is silly, let's
[Guest]: start mixing.
[Guest]: But it's far more difficult to imagine people
[Guest]: who have been freely mixing
[Guest]: for 2000 years
[Guest]: almost and then suddenly
[Guest]: decided, hey this doesn't make sense, let's
[Guest]: stop mixing.
[Guest]: I mean, the horse has already bolted
[Guest]: right? So what is this about?
[Guest]: When you think it like that
[Guest]: you realize that and
[Guest]: you also realize that this takes
[Guest]: away the suggestion that the caste system
[Guest]: began with the arrival of the
[Guest]: Aryas, right? It doesn't begin
[Guest]: there's almost a 2000 year difference.
[Guest]: Then you realize
[Guest]: that this is more a political development
[Guest]: than a religious development
[Guest]: though with the caveat that it's often
[Guest]: difficult to distinguish politics
[Guest]: from religion. Even today.
[Guest]: Even today.
[Guest]: But it suggests that it's a
[Guest]: caste is a political development
[Guest]: more than a religious
[Guest]: development and it has, doesn't
[Guest]: have enough genetic
[Guest]: reasoning behind it because we are already
[Guest]: have, that's why Ambedkar is
[Guest]: right when he says there is no
[Guest]: difference between the
[Guest]: Dalits and the others because yes
[Guest]: we are a mixed population.
[Guest]: So what caused
[Guest]: this new political
[Guest]: ideology to come
[Guest]: into the front in around 100
[Guest]: CE?
[Guest]: We do not have clear answers.
[Guest]: So my book only says these are ways to
[Guest]: we need to farm our research
[Guest]: to answer these questions.
[Guest]: But we have some initial things to go by
[Guest]: and one of the things is
[Guest]: what you can see in the text
[Guest]: as a tension
[Guest]: between Aryavarta
[Guest]: and Malaysia Desha
[Guest]: or things that are not part of
[Guest]: Aryavarta.
[Guest]: And mind you both these regions are
[Guest]: inhabited by the Arya or people
[Guest]: who call themselves Arya and Indo-European
[Guest]: language speaking people.
[Guest]: Still the people of a
[Guest]: particular region who call themselves Aryavarta
[Guest]: find people
[Guest]: of the other region who are Arya
[Guest]: and who are Indo-European language speaking
[Guest]: not Kosher, not
[Guest]: really part of Aryavarta.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Guest]: The best argument that we can
[Guest]: possible reason that we can find
[Guest]: is that there are differences of
[Guest]: social attitudes and conservatism
[Guest]: and ideas about social mixing
[Guest]: between different parts of
[Guest]: the Arya who came into India
[Guest]: that they were not all of the same mind.
[Guest]: We already know this to some extent because
[Guest]: our texts themselves talk about
[Guest]: multiple groups and conflicts between groups.
[Guest]: So it is wrong to think of one monolithic
[Guest]: group of people with the same ideas
[Guest]: and same approach
[Guest]: to life in general and to
[Guest]: how societies should be structured
[Guest]: coming into the country. These are multiple groups
[Guest]: they had multiple beliefs
[Guest]: and ways of approach
[Guest]: somewhere more conservative, somewhere
[Guest]: to use current terminology
[Guest]: more liberal.
[Guest]: And it is likely that the
[Guest]: more conservative approach
[Guest]: to social life was dominant in what is called
[Guest]: Aryavarta which is in the confluence
[Guest]: in the area between the Ganga
[Guest]: and the Yamuna.
[Guest]: And the areas outside of that confluence
[Guest]: are regarded as
[Guest]: Malaysia Dasha by who asked this question
[Guest]: which is the land of the Aryavarta
[Guest]: and defines it in this way.
[Guest]: So the area outside of the confluence
[Guest]: of the Ganga and Yamuna which would include
[Guest]: parts of what would later
[Guest]: come to be known as Magadha
[Guest]: is actually where the next
[Guest]: is the center of the second urbanization
[Guest]: that happens. It is a place where
[Guest]: the new religions arise.
[Guest]: Buddhism and Jainism
[Guest]: which did not accept many
[Guest]: rituals and practices
[Guest]: of the earlier religion
[Guest]: and it is also where the next
[Guest]: empire comes from.
[Guest]: So if you assume that there is
[Guest]: a tension between these two
[Guest]: regions, by around
[Guest]: 100 CE you have to, the only
[Guest]: conclusion that you can arrive at is that
[Guest]: this tension was resolved
[Guest]: in one way with the victory
[Guest]: of one, victory meaning
[Guest]: one opinion of
[Guest]: how the society should be structured and organized
[Guest]: gaining over the other side
[Amit Varma]: on how it should be.
[Amit Varma]: So that one cultural strand and the
[Amit Varma]: you know this continued
[Amit Varma]: almost enforced endogamy
[Amit Varma]: in a sense has interesting
[Amit Varma]: consequences. I want to quote this passage from
[Amit Varma]: David Reich's book Who We Are and How
[Amit Varma]: We Got Here which
[Amit Varma]: you know you have quoted in your book and
[Amit Varma]: that is also a great book.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, people tend to think
[Amit Varma]: India with its more than 1.3 billion
[Amit Varma]: people is having a tremendously large
[Amit Varma]: population and indeed many Indians
[Amit Varma]: as well as foreigners see it this way.
[Amit Varma]: But genetically this is an incorrect
[Amit Varma]: way to view the situation.
[Amit Varma]: The Han Chinese are truly a large population
[Amit Varma]: they have been mixing freely for thousands of
[Amit Varma]: years. In contrast there are
[Amit Varma]: few if any Indian groups that are
[Amit Varma]: demographically very large and the
[Amit Varma]: degree of genetic differentiation
[Amit Varma]: between Indian Jati groups living
[Amit Varma]: side by side in the same village
[Amit Varma]: is typically 2 or 3 times
[Amit Varma]: higher than the genetic differentiation
[Amit Varma]: between Northern and Southern Europeans.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is that
[Amit Varma]: India is composed of
[Amit Varma]: a large number of small populations.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And this is
[Amit Varma]: in a sense very disturbing
[Amit Varma]: just as a picture of where we are today
[Amit Varma]: because this is not just true in a genetic
[Amit Varma]: sense, a large number of small populations.
[Guest]: Yes and this is
[Guest]: the result of the last
[Guest]: 2000 years. We have a history
[Guest]: that is much larger
[Guest]: and as I put it, yeah
[Guest]: it is disheartening to read that
[Guest]: and but
[Guest]: the way I see it is
[Guest]: that we have to realise
[Guest]: that this was not inevitable
[Guest]: this was not the way we were going
[Guest]: even after all of the elements
[Guest]: of the Indian population groups were in
[Guest]: this was not the way we were going.
[Guest]: So what happened around 100 CE
[Guest]: has to be seen as something
[Guest]: as a political development
[Guest]: and if it is a political development that
[Guest]: happened around then it can be
[Guest]: pushed back and can be
[Guest]: seen to be different. When you say
[Guest]: pushed back, I am not talking about laws and things
[Guest]: like that, that has already been done.
[Guest]: But culturally. But I am saying our basic
[Guest]: understanding, why does it survive?
[Guest]: Because our basic understanding
[Guest]: of how this population, how we are
[Guest]: put together hasn't
[Guest]: changed and that's what I hope this book will
[Guest]: change that our basic understanding
[Guest]: of who we are has to change
[Guest]: for this miss
[Guest]: for this reality to change
[Guest]: also that endogamy
[Guest]: has cost us and the cost is much
[Guest]: one of the cost we already know
[Guest]: because we talk about it because
[Guest]: a division like this prevents
[Guest]: people from reaching to the heights
[Guest]: of their competence and
[Guest]: to how far they can go because if you are saying
[Guest]: birth determines to a large extent
[Guest]: where you can go, we are saying
[Amit Varma]: no to a lot of
[Amit Varma]: I mean the human cost is incalculable, there is no question
[Guest]: yeah. The second part
[Guest]: is equally important which we may
[Guest]: not realize all the time
[Guest]: is that it's important for people
[Guest]: in any community, especially
[Guest]: in a locality
[Guest]: society's progress
[Guest]: and progress fast when they
[Guest]: take common action to the benefit of
[Guest]: everybody. But if the
[Guest]: structures are even within villages are such
[Guest]: that it is difficult
[Guest]: to take common action that would
[Guest]: benefit everybody because there are so many
[Guest]: divisions, then that's a
[Guest]: whole lot of positive things that we
[Guest]: are saying no to
[Guest]: and so the cost of this
[Guest]: we have to realize, only then will
[Guest]: I think we will get to
[Guest]: reversing this in a significant way
[Guest]: it's distressing to see how often
[Guest]: how inter-coming is still
[Guest]: a practice if you know
[Guest]: various research that is done in
[Guest]: marriage practices and things like that still shows
[Guest]: that it's a very dominant trend
[Amit Varma]: and it's not changing. It's embedded
[Amit Varma]: in our culture now no matter what the laws might say
[Amit Varma]: speaking of you know
[Amit Varma]: current modern politics
[Amit Varma]: why do these
[Amit Varma]: new findings
[Amit Varma]: get so much pushback
[Amit Varma]: like even you have been trolled so often on twitter
[Amit Varma]: for example
[Amit Varma]: you know why does it matter
[Amit Varma]: why do people in politics have a stake on
[Amit Varma]: whether the Aryans came this way or that way
[Amit Varma]: who was there first
[Amit Varma]: what is the original Indian culture
[Amit Varma]: what is the role of the Vedas
[Amit Varma]: why does all of this matter
[Amit Varma]: I imagine that look we are in the 21st century
[Amit Varma]: and it should not matter
[Amit Varma]: all of this is just of academic interest
[Amit Varma]: but no but these are like life
[Guest]: political questions why
[Guest]: that's right I think it's also interesting
[Guest]: to note that I know I consistently
[Guest]: talk about four large migrations
[Guest]: nobody has any problems with
[Guest]: three of them
[Guest]: there's nobody raises an
[Guest]: objection to saying no
[Guest]: we did not come from out of Africa
[Guest]: nobody says no there was no
[Guest]: Tamil is not
[Guest]: related to Ilam
[Guest]: we came from here there's nobody saying
[Guest]: any objection to any of the first
[Guest]: three migrations the only objection
[Guest]: is to only one of them
[Guest]: the Arya migration
[Guest]: and the reason I think is born out of a
[Guest]: misunderstanding that
[Guest]: our civilization is single source
[Guest]: and it is from
[Guest]: the Aryas, the Vedas, the Sanskrit
[Guest]: and if you say that came from
[Guest]: that was the result of a migration then you are saying
[Guest]: all of our culture is
[Guest]: imported that's wrong because
[Guest]: what the book argues is that
[Guest]: our civilization is a mixture of
[Guest]: multiple influences the
[Guest]: Harappan civilization is as much is
[Guest]: an earlier source is the first
[Guest]: source if you can say or at least
[Guest]: an earlier source of Indian civilization
[Guest]: which has left a large imprint on our
[Guest]: culture the Arya Sanskrit
[Guest]: Vedic tradition is a very important
[Guest]: constituent of the Indian civilization
[Guest]: but it is not the earliest
[Guest]: or the only one so you do not
[Guest]: need to be horrified if you say
[Guest]: like other migrations the Arya
[Guest]: also came as migrants about
[Guest]: 4000 to 3000 years ago
[Guest]: the second factor is that there is an
[Guest]: assumption that if you say they brought
[Guest]: into European languages then you are
[Guest]: saying the Vedas and the Sanskrit you know
[Guest]: all came from imported
[Guest]: in flat pack you know and then
[Guest]: recombined after
[Guest]: opening the package that's not true
[Guest]: the Sanskrit
[Guest]: and the Vedas almost all of it
[Guest]: is the result of interaction with people
[Guest]: who are already settled here and
[Guest]: that's not something that is foreign that is very much
[Guest]: that's how all of our things are
[Guest]: it is a mixture of different traditions
[Guest]: different ancestries different stories
[Guest]: so these two things
[Guest]: have to be these
[Guest]: fears have to be taken out of the picture
[Guest]: but that's only part of the problem
[Guest]: the other part of the problem is not out of
[Guest]: these fears but as
[Guest]: the British historian E.J.
[Guest]: Hobsbawm said
[Guest]: the historian is to
[Guest]: nationalists but the opium
[Guest]: makers or poppy growers
[Guest]: are to heroin addicts
[Guest]: they provide the raw material that the market
[Guest]: needs. The market for nationalism
[Guest]: needs an idea
[Guest]: of identity
[Guest]: creation requires myths
[Guest]: about who we are
[Guest]: and what we are and there are myths
[Guest]: that are more
[Guest]: appealing for political purposes
[Guest]: and there are myths that are not that appealing to
[Guest]: political purposes or
[Guest]: reality that is not appealing to political
[Guest]: purposes. So I think
[Guest]: what this book tries
[Guest]: to do is that until now we did
[Guest]: not have solid
[Guest]: scientific data and evidence
[Guest]: to give clear answers to our
[Guest]: prehistory which is essentially where the
[Guest]: fundamental questions about the formation of our
[Guest]: population lie
[Guest]: now we have. So I hope
[Guest]: that discussions about
[Guest]: our population formation
[Guest]: and therefore everything else that follows
[Guest]: will begin to be
[Guest]: based on actual scientific
[Guest]: data and findings
[Guest]: rather than
[Guest]: myths, fancies and
[Guest]: caricatures of reality.
[Amit Varma]: I find it
[Amit Varma]: bizarre that there are some nationalistic narratives
[Amit Varma]: that are so simplistic that they
[Amit Varma]: place value judgments on what came
[Amit Varma]: earlier or what originated here
[Amit Varma]: or what came from outside. I mean it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter we are all from Africa
[Amit Varma]: and we are all basically a Khichri
[Amit Varma]: and your book in that
[Amit Varma]: sense by summing up the
[Amit Varma]: dramatic advances that
[Amit Varma]: science has made in the last 6 years
[Amit Varma]: both gave me a lot of joy and a lot of hope. Thank you
[Guest]: so much for coming on the show Tommy. It was a pleasure
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much. I really liked this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at
[Amit Varma]: and you can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: on seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.